	
Dear Ms. Kytle and Western Slopes Business Association (501c3 located in Richmond):
The Johnson Company is pleased to present you with this report of our findings of a Phase I 
Environmental Site Assessment of the Former Saputo Cheese/Richmond Creamery site, which is 
composed of two parcels currently owned by Richmond Community Senior Center, Inc., located 
at 74 Jolina Court and 125 Bridge Street in Richmond, Vermont, respectively.  This ESA was 
conducted in accordance with the scope and limitations of the American Society for Testing and 
Materials' (ASTM) Standard Practice for Environmental Site Assessments E 1527-13 and in 
conformance with 40 CFR Part 312, Standards and Practices for All Appropriate Inquiries.  

We appreciate being of assistance to you on this project.  Please do not hesitate to contact either 
Jeremy Matt or me should you have questions regarding the following information.

Sincerely,

THE JOHNSON COMPANY, INC.

 
ENVIRONMENTAL PROFESSIONAL DECLARATION
Phase I Environmental Site Assessment Report
Former Saputo Cheese/Richmond Creamery
Richmond, Vermont


We declare that, to the best of our professional knowledge and belief, we meet the definition of 
Environmental Professional as defined in 312.10 of 40 CFR Part 312.   

We have the specific qualifications based on education, training, and experience to assess a 
property of the nature, history, and setting of the subject property.  We have developed and 
performed the all appropriate inquiries in conformance with the standards and practices set forth 
in 40 CFR Part 312.  

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Johnson Company, Inc. of Montpelier, Vermont was retained by Buttermilk Properties of 
Waterbury Center, Vermont (Buttermilk) and Western Slopes Business Association (WSBA; 
501c3 located in Richmond) to conduct a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment (ESA) of the 
former Saputo Cheese/Richmond Creamery facility located on two parcels at 74 Jolina Court 
(Parcel 1) and 125 Bridge Street (Parcel 2) in Richmond, Vermont (the Site).  The Johnson 
Company understands that Buttermilk and WSBA will be using this Phase I ESA to support a 
potential property transfer and redevelopment of the Site which will include both commercial 
and residential use. 

This ESA was performed by personnel from JCO who meet the definition of Environmental 
Professional as defined in 40 CFR Part 312.  This ESA included reviewing existing 
documentation, available aerial photographs and topographic maps, determining the regulatory 
status of the Site, contacting personnel regarding past and present uses of the Site, investigating 
the potential for past releases of petroleum products and/or hazardous substances at the Site, and 
conducting a site reconnaissance to visually inspect accessible portions of the Site to ascertain 
the presence of recognized environmental conditions (RECs) in the form of present or potential 
release(s) of hazardous substances or petroleum products. In addition, these sources were 
investigated for the presence of historic recognized environmental conditions (HRECs) - a past 
release of hazardous substance(s) that has been addressed to residential use standards or 
unrestricted use criteria - and controlled recognized environmental conditions (CREC) - a past 
release of hazardous substance(s) that has been addressed to non-residential use standards and is 
subject to some type of control - at the Site.  As such, a HREC is not a REC when the remaining 
environmental conditions are compliant with the most current regulatory criteria; and a CREC is 
a REC.

The Johnson Company has performed this Phase I Environmental Site Assessment in 
conformance with the scope and limitations of ASTM Practice E-1527-13, for the Former 
Richmond Creamery property in Richmond, Vermont.  Any exception to, or deletions from, this 
practice are described in Section 8.1 of this report.  This assessment has revealed no evidence of 
RECs in connection with the property except for the following:  

Known Soil Contamination: Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and metals were 
identified in surficial soils at concentrations above applicable soil screening levels during 
the 2010 Johnson Company Phase II ESA.  An Analysis of Brownfield Cleanup 
Alternatives (ABCA) and Remedial Action Work Plan (RAWP) has been prepared for 
the Site.  The actions detailed in these documents are currently being implemented at the 
Site.

Known Soil Contamination: Metals were detected in groundwater at concentrations 
above Vermont Groundwater Enforcement Standards (VGES) and a corrective action is 
detailed in the September 2015 RAWP.

The following items are beyond the scope of a Phase I ESA (as defined by ASTM 1527-13) and 
therefore are not considered formal RECs; however these items should be considered during any 
future investigation, construction, or renovation planning:

Containerized potentially hazardous materials in the former factory and storage buildings.  
Some of these containers were observed to be uncovered, which presents risk for spills or 
releases.  These containerized hazardous materials must be managed appropriately during 
Site redevelopment to prevent releases.

A 10,000-gallon above ground storage tank containing some residual fuel oil sludge is 
present on the Site and an abandoned, partially buried wastewater UST is also present.  
The sludge from the AST & UST should be removed and the tanks should be cleaned and 
removed to prevent potential future releases. 


1.0  INTRODUCTION
      The Johnson Company, Inc. of Montpelier, Vermont (JCO) was retained by Buttermilk 
Properties of Waterbury Center, Vermont (Buttermilk) and Western Slopes Business Association 
(WSBA; 501c3 located in Richmond) to conduct a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment 
(ESA) of the former Saputo Cheese/Richmond Creamery facility located on two parcels at 74 
Jolina Court (Parcel 1) and 125 Bridge Street (Parcel 2) in Richmond, Vermont (the Site).  The 
location of the Site is depicted in Figure 1. 
      
      The purpose of this ESA is to identify Recognized Environmental Conditions (RECs) 
associated with the Site that indicate the presence or likely presence of hazardous substances or 
petroleum products resulting from conditions associated with an existing release, past release, or  
a material threat of a release at the Site.  Based on information provided by the current property 
owner (Richmond Community Senior Center, Inc.), review of previous investigation reports, 
discussion with the Town of Richmond and on inspections of the Site by JCO employees, JCO 
understands that the facility was an active creamery and cheese making facility until 1999.  The 
property sat vacant until 2016 and the on-Site buildings fell into various states of disrepair.  In 
2016, Buttermilk began redevelopment activities, starting with asbestos abatement, demolition of 
all on-site structures, and underground storage tank (UST) closure.  The proposed redevelopment 
includes commercial and residential spaces.  
        
      This ESA included reviewing existing information made available and/or that was 
reasonably ascertainable regarding current and past usage of the Site, determining the Site's 
regulatory status, contacting appropriate personnel regarding current and past uses of the Site, 
investigating past, present and/or the potential for releases of hazardous substances at the Site, 
and conducting a reconnaissance to visually inspect the accessible portions of the Site.  
      
      This ESA was performed by JCO personnel from who meet the definition of 
Environmental Professional as defined in 40 CFR Part 312, in conformance within the scope and 
limitations of ASTM E 1527-13 in compliance with 40 CFR Part 312, Standards and Practices 
for All Appropriate Inquiries.  

      Credentials of JCO personnel involved with the preparation of this ESA are included as 
Appendix 1.
2.0  SITE DESCRIPTION
      The Site, as defined in this report, consists of a former food product manufacturing 
facility and surrounding property owned by Richmond Community Senior Center, Inc.  The Site 
has historically been divided into four parcels, but now consists of two contiguous parcels:  
Parcel 1 (approximately 0.16 acres); and Parcel 2, which is currently composed of three formerly 
separate parcels merged into one parcel of approximately 5.84 acres.  The Site abuts the northern 
and eastern sides of the Town of Richmond cemetery and is accessed from a gravel roadway 
identified as Jolina Court, which extends from Bridge Street in an easterly direction.
2.1	SETTING AND SURROUNDING DEVELOPMENT
      The land surrounding the Site is primarily used for commercial and agricultural purposes, 
with the nearest residential properties approximately 200 feet to the northeast.  The Site is 
bounded by a cemetery to the west, the New England Central Railroad tracks to the northeast, 
and the Winooski River floodplain to the south.  The neighboring property to the southeast of the 
Site is a field used for agricultural purposes, which is partially within the Site boundary.  The 
Richmond Town Offices (Post Office, Town Office, and Library) are located on Bridge Street, 
directly to the southwest of the Site, separated from the Site buildings by sparse woods and steep 
slopes.  The Chittenden East Supervisory Union office and preschool is also located in the town 
office complex.  The Site and surrounding properties are depicted on Figure 2.
      
      The following structures were formerly present on Parcel 1:  a former cheese processing 
factory (the basement footprint is approximately 14,440 square feet, although the first and 
second floors are smaller) that was operational between circa 1900 and 1999, a former storage 
shed (approximately 550 square feet) and boiler building (approximately 2,200 square feet), a 
small steel shed (approximately 150 square feet), brushy vegetation, a dirt roadway, a wooded 
slope, and a small portion of a field used for agricultural purposes that is considered to be in the 
Winooski River floodplain.  Parcel 2 formerly hosted a dilapidated building that was formerly a 
blacksmith shop (approximately 2,980 square feet).  All on-site buildings were in poor repair and 
have been demolished.  Topographically, the ground surface generally slopes towards the 
southwest and southeast in the direction of the Winooski River floodplain.  A Site Layout Map is 
included in Figure 3. 
2.2	HEATING, WATER AND SEWER
      During operation, the factory was originally heated with a fuel oil fired boiler, but was 
converted to use propane-heating units.  Although the exact date of this conversion is not known, 
the 2002 H&N ESA identified a 10,000 gallon propane tank, and boilers are described as using 
propane "in recent years".  According to Mr. Caswell (former Property Owner), the 10,000 
gallon propane tank was removed in 2003 for insurance purposes.  A 10,000ñ gallon above 
ground storage tank (AST) used to store #6 heating oil remains at the Site and is located 
approximately 50 feet northeast of the former boiler building.  Although some heating oil sludge 
remained, the tank appeared to be in good condition with only minor rust, minimal pitting, and 
no visible evidence of leaks or staining of the nearby soil.  It was noted in the Environmental 
Questionnaire (originally completed by Mr. Scott Ingalls, former partner of Casing 
Development, LLC for the October, 2008 Phase I ESA) that minor releases may have occurred at 
the fuel oil tank while being filled, although no release was ever witnessed.  This AST appeared 
to have been formerly connected to the boiler house by overhead piping, but no pumps are 
present and it appears that the piping has been disconnected from the AST.  Shallow surface soil 
sampling was performed in the immediate vicinity of this AST during the April 2010, Phase II 
ESA.  Analytical results from this sampling were below the applicable screening levels, 
suggesting that a significant fuel oil release had not occurred.  Note that the Environmental 
Questionnaire was subsequently updated by Mr. Craig Caswell of Casing Development, LLC for 
the September 2015 Phase I ESA, and updated by Ms. Mary O'Neil, President of the Richmond 
Community Senior Center for the June 2016 Phase I ESA.  Most recently the Environmental 
Questionnaire was updated by ________ of _______ for this Phase I ESA. 
      
      An anhydrous ammonia refrigeration system was utilized when the factory was 
operational.  The primary receiver was cleared of ammonia in August 2013, and the remainder of 
the system was decommissioned in ___.  There was no visible evidence of leaks, although an 
ammonia release in 1997 was listed on the Federal Emergency Response Notification and 
VTDEC database.  Mr. Tom Levesque, the town of Richmond Fire Chief, was interviewed on 
September 24, 2015 and indicated he had responded to an ammonia release.  The release is 
discussed in further detail in Section 4.2.6 and Section 4.4.1.  

      Potable water is supplied by the Richmond municipal water supply.  According to 
correspondence with the Richmond Town Administrator, the Town of Richmond began 
providing municipal water services in 1955, and the Richmond Creamery connected to the 
municipal water supply sometime after this service became available, and before 1985 
(Rodjenski, 2008).  Prior to this connection, an on-Site water supply well was active.  This well 
is located in a concrete tower and is not easily accessible.  
      
      During the later portion of factory operations, wastewater generated at the facility was 
managed by the Richmond Wastewater treatment facility.  Wastewater, comprised mostly of 
whey water, a by-product of the cheese-making processes, was stored in a large equalization and 
aeration tank and was routinely tested prior to conveyance to the municipal wastewater facility.  
According to the former co-owner, Mr. Ingalls, this tank was removed between 2003 and 2004 
for use at the Hinesburg Saputo Cheese Factory.  After removal of the tank, the wastewater 
collection pipes on either side were connected and insulated with an earthen berm to prevent 
freezing.  Additionally, an abandoned smaller tank also previously used for wastewater processes 
at the factory remains onsite directly to the northeast of the berm.  According to correspondence 
with the Richmond Town Administrator, the Richmond Creamery was connected to municipal 
wastewater treatment in 1971, when Town of Richmond began providing municipal wastewater 
services.  Prior to the 1971 connection, all wastes (process, sanitary) were discharged directly 
into the Winooski River (Rodjenski, 2008).  As such, it is unlikely that a septic system or leach 
field was ever constructed on-Site.
      
      Electricity to the Site was provided by Green Mountain Power (GMP) via overhead lines.  
Based on conversations with GMP field staff (GMP, 2008), the overhead lines and transformers 
were removed at the request of the property owner between 2001 and 2003. 
2.3	GEOLOGY AND HYDROGEOLOGY
      The Vermont Agency of Natural Resources (VTANR) Natural Resources Atlas (NRA) 
maps the surficial geology at the site as "Postglacial fluvial deposit", composed of sand and 
gravel formations from river-transported deposits (ANR1, 2017). These deposits are associated 
with the Winooski River corridor. 
      
      The northern portion of the Site soil is defined as Duane and Deerfield soils which are 
described as moderately well drained fine sands with high loam content to 15 inches, and high 
gravel content below 4 inches. The depth to water table within this soil formation is typically 18-
24 inches.   The southern portion of the Site is mapped as Hadley, a very fine sand loam (ANR1, 
2017).  
      
      The bedrock in the area is the Underhill Formation, which is described as silvery-green 
quartz-muscovite-chlorite schist and phyllite, commonly with albite and magnetite, locally 
contains dolomite (Ratcliffe, et al. 2012).
      
      The direction of groundwater flow was not directly measured during this ESA.  However 
the groundwater elevation data collected during the 2010 JCO Phase II ESA suggests 
groundwater flows towards the southeast towards the Winooski River.
      
2.4	THREATENED SPECIES AND WETLANDS
      The VTANR NRA lists one rare, threatened, or endangered species (an invertebrate 
animal, no name listed) and one "significant natural community" (silver maple-ostrich fern 
riverine floodplain forest) at locations potentially down-gradient of the Site.  In addition, one 
rare, threatened or endangered species, three uncommon species, and four significant natural 
communities are mapped within 1 mile of the Site at locations which are presumed to be up-
gradient or cross-gradient of the Site (ANR1, 20167).
3.0  SITE HISTORY AND REVIEW OF EXISTING INFORMATION
3.1	HISTORICAL REVIEW
3.1.1	Land Records
      A search of the Land Records in the Richmond Town Clerk's office on the day of the Site 
walkover, June 1, 2016, identified two parcels within the boundaries of the Site.  Parcel 1 is a 
0.16 acre parcel, located at 125 Bridge Street.  Parcel 2 is a 5.84 acre parcel, located at 74 Jolina 
Court.  The current owner of both parcels was listed as Community Senior Center, Inc.  Note that 
the prior owner, Casing Development, LLC, acquired two additional parcels (Parcels 3 and 4) 
within the boundary of Parcel 1 in 2004 from Canadian National Railroad.  Because these two 
parcels appear to have been created by conflicting deed descriptions and outdated surveying 
methods, the prior history of these parcels was not researched as part of this report. 
      
      During the June 1, 2016 records review, it was noted that Peak Properties filed a Notice 
of Claim on October 7, 2015 (book 231, page 582).  This Notice was released on March 29, 2016 
(book 233, page 660).
      
      Note that JCO staff are not title attorneys - any prospective purchaser should retain the 
services of a qualified title professional to review the Site's title history.  Details of historical 
ownership transfers obtained from the Richmond Town Clerk's office and Mr. Ingalls are 
summarized in Table 1.  
3.1.2	U.S.G.S. Topographic Maps
      The 1919, 1921, 1924, 1944, 1948, 1980, and 2012 15-minute United States Geological 
Survey (USGS) topographic quadrangle maps for the target area were provided by 
Environmental Data Resources, Inc. (EDR) and reviewed as part of this ESA. The maps are 
included in Appendix 2. With the exception of the 2012 map which does not show any 
structures, all of the maps show a building at the approximate location of the factory, to the 
southwest of the railroad line.  The 1948 and 1980 maps shows what appears to be a railroad 
spur leading to the factory, and some additional buildings to the southwest of the Site on Bridge 
Street.  The historical maps indicate that the Site and neighboring properties have not 
significantly changed since 1924.
3.1.3	Aerial Photographs
      Aerial photographs from 1960, 1976, 1984, 1986, 1992, 1994, 1999, 2006, 2008, 2009, 
2011 and 2012 were provided by EDR and reviewed as part of this ESA. The aerial photos are 
included as Appendix 2. The 1960 and 1978 aerial photographs were of poor quality and while 
structures do appear to be present at the Site within the footprint of the former cheese factory, 
detailed features could not be deciphered. All other aerial photos depict the Site in the current 
configuration, with an increasing amount of vegetation around the Site from past to present. 
3.1.4	Sanborn Fire Insurance Maps
      Historical Sanborn Fire Insurance Maps from 1894, 1899, 1904, 1910, 1926, and 1939 
were provided by EDR. The maps are included in Appendix 2.  The 1894, 1899, 1904, and 1910 
Sanborn maps show only the area around the blacksmith shop.  This shop is shown as general 
storage on the 1894, 1899, and 1904 maps and as the Vermont Condensed Milk Co on the 1910 
map.  The blacksmith shop is labeled "blacksmith & wheelwright" on the 1926 map and as 
"grain" on the 1939 map.  The creamery building is shown on the 1926 and 1939 Sanborn maps 
and is labeled as "Richmond Cooperative Association Creamery".  There were three structures 
shown with the label "Oil Tanks" on the 1926 and 1939 maps to the north of the factory 
building, at the edge of the Jolina Court roadway.  A magnetometer survey of the area was 
conducted during the 2010 Phase II ESA and no evidence of buried tanks was found in this area.
      
3.1.5	City Directories
The Cole Information Sources for Richmond were provided by EDR (provided in Appendix 2). 
No information for the Site is available prior to 2013. In 2013, the "Vermont Land Trust 
Champlain Valley" at #13 Jolina Ct. This is presumably the structure on the northern corner of 
Jolina Ct and Bridge St (parcel ID#: 519-163-10004) and is not part of the Site.  No other 
information was available through city directories. 
3.1.6	Environmental Questionnaire
      The Johnson Company's standard Environmental Questionnaire was provided to Mr. 
Scott Ingalls and was received by JCO on October 3, 2008 as part of the October 2008 Phase I 
ESA.  This questionnaire was updated by Mr. Craig Caswell on June 3, 2015 for inclusion in the 
September 2015 Phase I ESA report.  On May 24, 2016 this questionnaire was further updated 
by Ms. Mary O'Neil, President of the Richmond Community Senior Center for this Phase I ESA. 
A copy of the completed questionnaire is included in Appendix 3.
3.2	INTERVIEWS
3.2.1	Current Owner
      The current property owner (Richmond Community Senior Center, Inc.; RCSC) 
purchased the Site on March 25, 2016.  In the environmental questionnaire, Ms. Mary O'Neil 
(President, RCSC) stated that "RCSC has no independent knowledge or information that 
conflicts with the responses set forth above [in the Environmental Questionnaire]" and that "to 
the best of RCSC's knowledge, there has been no change of circumstance or condition with 
respect to the Site during its term of ownership".  Because RSCS does not have any additional 
information regarding the Site, a representative of RCSC was not interviewed.
3.2.2	Past Owner/Occupant
      Mr. Scott Ingalls (co-owner of the Site in 2008) accompanied JCO staff on the September 
23, 2008 Site visit, and answered questions regarding environmental conditions at the Site to the 
best of his ability.  Mr. Ingalls had some knowledge of the history of the Site and previous 
factory operations.  
      
      Prior to the property transfer to Casing Development in 2002, Saputo Cheese Factory 
owned and operated the Site.  A representative from Saputo Cheese was interviewed as part of 
the 2002 Heindel & Noyes Phase I ESA, the executive summary of which is included in 
Appendix 4.
3.2.3	State/Local Officials
      Representatives of the Richmond Fire Department and Police Department were 
interviewed regarding hazardous materials incidents at the Site.  Details of these interviews are 
provided in Sections 4.4.1 and 4.4.2 below.
3.2.4	Neighboring or Nearby Property Owner/Occupant	  
      The Town of Richmond is a neighboring land owner.  Mr. Geoffrey Urbanik, Town 
Manager, was interviewed on August 7, 2017 regarding hazardous materials incidents at the Site 
as a representative of the Town of Richmond.  Mr. Urbanik said that he was not aware of any 
incidences regarding hazardous material releases or threats to human health or the environment 
(Urbanik, 2017).
3.3	PRIOR INVESTIGATIONS
      Prior investigations & remedial actions at the Site have included 1) a Phase I 
Environmental Site Assessment (ESA) report was issued by Heindel and Noyes (H&N) on 
December 2, 2002; 2) a Phase I ESA conducted by JCO dated October 29, 2008; 3) a Phase II 
ESA conducted by JCO dated April 9, 2010; and 4) partial decommissioning of the ammonia 
refrigeration system conducted on August 8, 2013 by ENPRO Services of South Burlington, VT.  
Additional discussion is provided in the sections below and the complete reports have been 
archived with the VTDEC. 
3.3.1	H&N 2002 Phase I ESA	  
      In 2002, Heindel & Noyes was retained to perform a Phase I ESA of the Former 
Richmond Creamery.  Recognized Environmental Conditions (RECs) identified at the Site by 
Heindel & Noyes include the presence of an ammonia refrigeration system, the presence of 
above-ground storage tanks (ASTs) and USTs, the potential for impacts from former Site 
activities and activities adjacent to the Site such as PAH impacts from the railroad and PCB 
impacts from oil-containing electrical equipment, the presence of a variety of potentially 
hazardous trash and debris, and the potential presence of lead-based paint and/or asbestos-
containing materials (ACM) in the building.  Additional details regarding the specific RECs 
identified by Heindel & Noyes are available in the 2002 report which had been filed with the 
VTDEC. 
3.3.2	The Johnson Company 2008 Phase I ESA	  
      In 2008 JCO was retained by Chittenden County Regional Planning Commission 
(CCRPC) to perform a Phase I ESA that confirmed the RECs that were identified in the 2002 
Heindel and Noyes assessment.  The JCO Phase I ESA also identified the presence of a buried 
concrete structure to the south of the factory building and the possible presence of USTs owned 
by Standard Oil Company.  Additional details are available in the JCO Phase I ESA which has 
been filed with the VTDEC.
3.3.3	Phase II ESA: The Johnson Company 2010
      JCO was again retained by CCRPC to perform a Phase II ESA to address the RECs 
identified in the JCO Phase I ESA.  This work included: 
1)	Collection of soil samples for laboratory analysis and for metals field screening.
Findings: Soils contaminated with metals and PAHs above applicable screening 
values exist at the Site.  The degree of impacts is greater to the north (near the 
railroad corridor) and lesser farther to the south.
2)	Installation and sampling of monitoring wells.
Findings: Groundwater samples contained metals at concentrations above Vermont 
groundwater enforcement standards (VGES).  However, no on-site sources of 
contamination were identified and after review of the data and consultation with 
VTDEC it was determined that no additional groundwater sampling would be 
required.
3)	Collection of soil and interior bulk concrete samples for PCB analysis.
Findings: PCBs were not detected at concentrations above the laboratory detection 
limits in any samples
4)	Inspection of the building for asbestos, lead paint, and mold.
Findings: Asbestos, lead paint and mold were detected in samples collected from 
within the main building.  The asbestos assessment conducted during the 2010 
Phase II ESA was considered preliminary. 
2015 Update: Additional sampling was conducted in the spring of 2015 by Clay 
Point Associates to develop the formal abatement design plan.  This sampling 
confirmed the presence of asbestos and lead paint and further defined the extents 
of these materials.
5)	Inspection of the exterior concrete pit.
Findings: The concrete pit was found to contain concrete rubble and no evidence 
of volatile organic compounds (VOC) impacts was found.  The purpose of this pit 
was not determined.
6)	A hazardous waste inventory.
Findings: A variety of potentially hazardous wastes were identified during the 
Phase II ESA.  
2015 Update: Based on the September 23, 2015 Site walkover conducted by JCO, 
the bulk of this material is no longer present at the Site.  However the removal was 
not overseen by JCO and no documentation of the removal has been provided.
7)	Inspection of the ammonia refrigeration system.
Findings: Approximately 125 gallons of ammonia were identified in the receiver of 
the ammonia refrigeration system.  
2015 Update: In August 2013 the anhydrous ammonia receiver was 
decommissioned, see Section 3.3.4, below.
8)	An assessment of the water supply well.
Findings: The water supply well is equipped with an approximately 15-foot 
concrete tower and could not be safely accessed and therefore samples were not 
collected from the well.  No details (casing diameter, depth, closure status, etc.) are 
known about this well.
9)	Characterization of the sump inside the building.
Findings: VOCs and PAHs were not detected in the aqueous sample collected from 
the sump.  Arsenic was detected at concentrations slightly above VGES; no other 
exceedances were reported.
3.3.4	Partial Ammonia System Decommissioning
      On August 8, 2013 ENPRO of South Burlington, Vermont oversaw the decommissioning 
of the anhydrous ammonia receiver (the main tank associated with the ammonia refrigeration 
system which contained residual refrigerant).  The actual decommissioning was conducted by 
Tanner Industries, Inc. of Southampton, PA.  According to a summary email from ENPRO dated 
February 26, 2014, approximately 77 gallons of anhydrous ammonia were removed and sent for 
recovery and the tank was purged with nitrogen.  According to ENPRO, the receiver is 
reportedly free of anhydrous ammonia and can be considered scrap metal.  However, this effort 
did not include decommissioning of any other portions of the refrigeration system (including 
piping and a potential ice maker).  While at least some of the valves appear to be open and the 
gauges are reading zero, the ammonia refrigeration technician could not confirm that the rest of 
the system is free of anhydrous ammonia. 
3.3.5	Phase II ESA: The Johnson Company 2015
      In 2015 The Johnson Company was retained by Buttermilk Properties and non-profit 
partners (Northwest Regional Planning Commission and Rutland Regional Planning 
Commission) to conduct a Phase I ESA of the Site.  This assessment identified soil 
contamination (PAHs and metals) and groundwater contamination (metals) as RECs at the Site.  
In addition to the official RECs, the 2015 Phase I ESA identified the following non-scope items: 
containerized potentially hazardous materials in the former factory and storage buildings; the 
10,000-gallon fuel oil storage AST and the wastewater UST; potential residual ammonia in the 
refrigeration system; asbestos in on-site buildings, primarily in the main factory building, and a 
small oil stain on the concrete floor of the boiler building (considered to be a de minimis 
condition).  The executive summary of this ESA is provided in Appendix 4. 
3.3.6	Asbestos Abatement, Building Demolition, and UST Closure (2016-2017)
      Between October 3, 2016 and December 1, 2016 demolition of the on-site buildings was 
conducted.  

4.0  REGULATORY STATUS
4.1	ENVIRONMENTAL LIENS
      	A search of the files at the Richmond Town Clerk's office on May 18, 2017 revealed no 
environmental liens on the property.  However, it is noted that JCO are not title attorneys.
4.2	FEDERAL REGULATORY FILES
	A database radius search report was provided by EDR (EDR, 2017).  Information for the 
following sub-sections was taken from the EDR report.  If the EDR results suggest that a more 
detailed assessment of a particular property or regulatory category is warranted, then the reason 
and additional search results will be detailed below.  Otherwise, all information provided in this 
section was obtained from the EDR Radius Map Report. The EDR Radius Map Report is 
included as Appendix 2.
4.2.1	Federal National Priority List (NPL)
      The Site is not listed on the National Priority List (NPL), i.e., Superfund site, nor is any 
property within a one mile search radius of the Site.
4.2.1.1	Delisted NPL sites 
		Neither the Site nor any other properties within the one mile search radius are 
delisted NPL sites.
4.2.2	Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Information 
System (CERCLIS) List
      The Site does not appear on the CERCLIS database and no other listed CERCLIS sites 
were identified within a 0.5 mile search radius of the Site.
4.2.2.1	No Further Remedial Action Planned (NFRAP) site list
      Neither the Site nor any sites within a 0.5 mile search radius are listed as 
CERCLIS designated sites with a no further remedial action planned (NFRAP) status.
4.2.3	Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Generators
      No RCRA generators are listed at the Site.  Two conditionally exempt small quantity 
generators (CESQGs) are located within 1/8-mile of the Site.
4.2.3.1	RCRA Corrective Action Sites (CORRACTS) List
      The Site is not on the list of RCRA Corrective Action sites for EPA Region 1, nor 
is any property within a one mile search radius of the Site.
4.2.4	RCRA Treatment, Storage and Disposal (TSD) Facilities
      There are no transportation and disposal (TSD) facilities listed within a 0.5 mile search 
radius of the Site.
4.2.5	Federal Institutional Control/Engineering Registries
      There are no federally-registered controls within a 0.5 mile search radius of the Site.
4.2.6	Federal Emergency Response Notification (ERNS) List
      	According to a query on the National Response Center website at the time of this report 
(NRC, 2017), there was a spill of anhydrous ammonia reported on November 14, 1997, related to 
operations at the Site.  The responsible party is listed as Richmond Cheese Company on Railroad 
Street in Richmond, Vermont.  According to the incident report, an unknown amount of 
anhydrous ammonia was released from a pump attached to seven 150 lb. cylinders.  The cause of 
the incident is listed on the incident report as "under investigation" and the incident report 
indicated the release was as contained within the building and there was no release to the 
environment.  This spill is also listed on the VTANR Waste Management Interactive Database 
(WMID) as spill number WMD400 (ANR2, 2017).
4.2.7	EPA On-Scene Coordinator Emergency Environmental Response
      The EPA On-scene Coordinator (EPA OSC) program performs rapid responses to remove 
direct contact risks by trespassers or the public.  The EPA OSC records are not part of the 
standard EDR database search, therefore JCO conducted a separate search of OSC records.  As 
of August 7, 2017 no OSC sites were listed within a 1.0-mile search radius of the Site (EPAOSC, 
2017).
4.3	STATE/TRIBAL REGULATORY FILES
	There are no recognized tribal or American Indian-owned lands within Vermont; 
therefore, no tribal files were searched during this ESA.
4.3.1	Hazardous Sites List
      The Site is listed on the hazardous site list with Vermont Site Management Section 
number 20083835. Please see Section 3.3 for more information on previous investigations at the 
Site.  Based on The Johnson Company's review of the EDR Radius Map Report and on the 
Vermont Agency of Natural Resources (ANR) Natural Resources Atlas (NRA), two active sites 
and five closed sites were identified to be within the 1-mile search radius of the Site (EDR, 2017; 
ANR1, 2017). These properties are identified on Table 2. 
      
      Based on the surrounding topography and on the groundwater potentiometric data 
collected during the Phase II ESA, a total of three sites are considered to be either potentially up-
gradient or potentially cross-gradient to the Site.  These sites are the GC Morris Residence, the 
Richmond Dental Clinic, and Harrington's Richmond.  

GC Morris Residence (Medium Priority, SMS# 2012-4295):
      The project status for the GC Morris Residence (located approximately 1,500-feet 
northwest of the Site) indicated that a 1,000-gallon heating oil tank was removed, that the tank 
was found to be in poor condition, and that additional work was required to determine the extent 
of contamination.  The initial site investigation conducted by Leggette, Brashears & Graham, 
Inc. did not identify any evidence of petroleum contamination in three soil borings advanced 
around the former UST location.  Similarly, no exceedances of the Vermont Groundwater 
Enforcement Standards (VGES) were reported in any of the samples collected from the site 
(LBG, 2012).   

Richmond Dental Clinic (SMAC, SMS# 2004-3292):
      The Richmond Dental Clinic is located at 72 Bridge Street in Richmond Vermont 
(approximately 600 feet northwest of the Site).  According to a February 2005 report prepared by 
KAS, Inc., of Williston, Vermont, petroleum impacts to subsurface soils were detected during 
the removal of a 1,000 gallon fuel oil UST in November 2004 (KAS, 2005).  Four shallow 
monitoring wells were subsequently installed, no petroleum compounds were reported above 
laboratory detection limits, and it was determined by the VTDEC that the source(s), nature, and 
extent of the petroleum contamination had been adequately defined to be confined to on-site 
soils.  The wells were subsequently closed (ANR2, 2017).

Harrington's Richmond (NFAP, SMS# 91-1114):
      The Harrington's Richmond property is located approximately 1,100-feet east of the Site.  
Based on a review of the data available on the WMID regarding this site, it is unclear why this 
property was initially listed as a hazardous waste site.  However, a 1991 investigation of the 
property by Heindel & Noyes found asbestos-containing materials in the building, but did not 
find any other recognized environmental conditions.  The report concluded that the floor drains 
at the facility were connected to the municipal sewer system and stated that no detectable 
petroleum hydrocarbons were reported in samples collected from points adjacent to the two 550-
gallon fuel oil tanks which provide heat to the facility (H&N, 1991).  
      
      Based on the surrounding topography, it is considered unlikely that groundwater or vapor 
contamination from any of the remaining four sites within one mile would have migrated to the 
Site.  Based on these findings, it is considered unlikely that environmental impacts to the Site 
from the eight hazardous waste sites located within one mile of the nearest property boundary 
have occurred. 
4.3.2	Underground Storage Tank List
      	There are no registered active underground storage tanks (USTs) at the Site (ANR2, 
2017).  However, one partially buried, unregistered, wastewater UST was formerly located at the 
Site.  Based on the data collected during the JCO Phase II ESA, the soils surrounding this tank 
did not appear to have impacted by petroleum releases.  In addition, a UST was encountered 
beneath the main creamery building during demolition.  This tank was subsequently closed (see 
Section 3.3 for additional details).
      
      There are listed USTs on adjacent properties at the Blue Seal Feeds building at 13 Jolina 
Court, at the Richmond Town Center on Bridge Street, and at Richmond Dental at 72 Bridge 
Street (one UST on each property).  The tanks at all three locations are listed as pulled.  
4.3.3	Spills List
      As discussed in Section 4.2.6, an Anhydrous Ammonia release was reported at the Site on 
November 14, 1997.  The WMID also lists an incident involving "unknown liquid flowing from 
pipe" which was reported on April 15, 1994.  No additional details are provided (ANR2, 2017; 
NRC, 2017).
4.3.4	Landfills
      There are no certified landfills within a 0.5 mile search radius of the Site (EDR, 2017).
4.3.5	Institutional Controls/Engineering Controls Registries
      An investigation of the records available at the Richmond Town Clerk's office revealed 
that no institutional and/or engineering controls had been filed in the Land Records for the Site 
as of June 1, 2016.
4.3.6	Voluntary Cleanup Sites
      Vermont does not specifically have a voluntary cleanup program, but the Brownfield 
Reuse Environmental Liability Limitation Act (BRELLA, effective July 1, 2008), acts as one for 
non-responsible parties.  
4.3.7	Brownfield Sites
      The Site is enrolled in the Brownfield Cleanup Program.  Additional details regarding the 
environmental conditions at the Site are provided in this report.  No other sites within 0.5 miles 
from the Site property boundary are enrolled in the program (EDR, 2017).  
4.4	LOCAL REGULATORY FILES	
4.4.1	Fire Department
      The Richmond Fire Department was contacted on September 24, 2015 regarding 
hazardous materials incidents at the Site.  Fire Chief Tom Levesque informed The Johnson 
Company that his department had responded to an ammonia leak at the Saputo Cheese Factory 
approximately 16 years ago.  Mr. Levesque stated that the ammonia spill was the result of a 
malfunctioning pump, and that the ammonia release was contained within the factory, although a 
strong ammonia smell was present outside the factory at the time of the release.  Other than a 
non-emergency inspection of the ammonia system which occurred approximately 2-years ago, 
Mr. Levesque did not recall any other responses to releases or spills of hazardous substances 
during his 40+ years with the Richmond Fire Department (Levesque, 2015).  On June 6, 2016 
Chief Dennis Gile (45 years tenure with the fire department) was contacted regarding hazardous 
materials incidents at the Site.  Chief Gile stated that there have been no changes to the property 
with respect to hazardous materials that he is aware of.  He did state that some efforts have been 
made to keep trespassers out of the building (Gile, 2016).
4.4.2	Police Department
      Richmond Police Chief Alan Buck, four years tenure as police chief, was interviewed on 
August 7, 2017 regarding hazardous materials incidents at the Site.  Chief Buck indicated that he 
was not aware of any such incidences at the Site (Buck, 2017).  
4.4.3	Local Electric Utility Company (Polychlorinated biphenyls)
	Electricity to the Site was served by Green Mountain Power (GMP) via overhead lines.  
According to telephone communication with GMP field operations personnel (GMP, 2008); all 
overhead lines and transformers were removed sometime between 2001 and 2003 at the request 
of the property owner.  Observations made during the Site visit on September 23, 2015 confirm 
that no overhead power lines or transformers were present at the Site, and Mr. Caswell further 
confirmed this in the Environmental Questionnaire.
4.5	NON-AAI/ASTM SCOPE CONSIDERATIONS
4.5.1	Asbestos and Lead Paint Issues
      Asbestos and lead-based paint inspections conducted during the 2010 Phase II ESA and 
in 2015 as part of the asbestos abatement design process.  These inspections identified both 
asbestos and lead paint in on-site buildings.  Additional details regarding asbestos and lead paint 
abatement activities are provided in Section 3.3.3.  In addition, a section of suspected asbestos-
containing cementitious pipe was observed on the Site surface during the August 26, 2017 Site 
walkover.  Additional details regarding the pipe are provided in Section 5.1.
5.0  SITE RECONNAISSANCE
      A Site walkover was conducted on August 26, 2017 by Jeremy Matt of JCO.  The 
weather conditions on the day of the Site visit were sunny, approximately 75 degrees, with light 
wind.  Photos taken during the Site visit are documented in the photo plates included as 
Appendix 5 of this report.  
5.1	EXTERIOR OBSERVATIONS
      The exterior portions of the Site consist of open, lightly vegetated land in the vicinity of 
the former structures and denser brushy and woody vegetation around the edges of the Site.  
With the exception of a small steel-sided shed (see Section 5.2 below for additional discussion of 
this shed) and a concrete tower housing a water supply well, no structures are present at the site.  
The Site surface in the vicinity former buildings (the main creamery building, the boiler room, 
and the blacksmith shop) has been disturbed by the recent demolition activities and has been 
mulched and seeded to reduce the potential for erosion.  In addition, approximately 12-inch 
diameter "coir logs" (bundles of organic material such as coconut fiber or straw used as erosion 
control devices) were noted at the downhill edges of the disturbed area.  
      
      During the walkover, the Site surface was inspected for any staining or evidence of 
potential contamination.  The following observations were made during the walkover:
*	In the footprint of the former blacksmith shop, a approximately 3-foot long, 4-
inch diameter piece of cementitious pipe was noted.  This pipe may be asbestos-
containing.  This pipe appeared to have been encountered during excavation 
activities and placed next to a trench box.  The pipe was placed directly on the 
Site surface and was not covered with poly sheeting.  
*	A concrete ring which appeared to be approximately the size of a typical utility 
hole, was observed near the eastern end of the former blacksmith shop.  The 
purpose of this structure is not known.
*	No evidence of significant erosion of Site soils was noted.  In particular, no 
erosion rills were noted and no sediment had collected against the downgradient 
coir logs.
*	Isolated piles of building materials (slate roofing tiles, lumber, and bricks) were 
noted stored on the Site.  These materials did not appear to be hazardous
*	An approximately 1-foot diameter patch of dark, possibly stained soils were noted 
in the approximate vicinity of the former #6 fuel oil AST.  It is unclear if this 
material originated from the AST or from a vehicle (the patch was situated 
between to very deep vehicle ruts).  However, the material appeared to have been 
in its current location for an extended period of time and did not appear to be 
related to closure of the AST.  It is considered likely that this is a de minimis 
condition.
*	No evidence of releases (staining, odors, etc) were noted in the vicinity of the 
former wastewater UST located to the southeast of the former creamery building.
*	Some miscellaneous debris (broken concrete, PVC piping, short sections of metal 
pipe, etc) was observed on the Site.  These materials were primarily noted around 
the edges of the Site in areas of denser vegetation and largely did not appear to be 
associated with the demolition activities at the Site.
*	A pit covered by a concrete slab was observed during the 2008 Phase I ESA 
walkover.  No evidence of this pit was noted during the August 26, 2017 Site 
walkover and it is presumed that this pit was demolished and backfilled during 
demolition of the main creamery building. 
*	The well formerly located within an approximately 15 foot concrete tower at the 
northeast corner of the Site has reportedly been closed.  However, the interior of 
the tower was not observed because the top of the tower was not safely accessible.  
Therefore, it was not possible to confirm if the well had been closed.  It should be 
noted that no evidence of recent activity (broken vegetation, footprints, etc) were 
noted near the well tower.  According to the Richmond Town Manager (Mr. 
Ronald Rodjenski) who was interviewed for the 2008 Phase I ESA, the well has 
not been used since the Site was connected to the Town of Richmond municipal 
water supply, and was not listed on the VTDEC well database (ANR2, 2016).  

      The approximate location of oil storage tanks documented on the 1926 and 1939 Sanborn 
Maps was inspected during the 2008 Phase II ESA with a magnetometer.  No tanks were located 
during this survey.
      
      The former rail spur that crossed the northeastern corner of the Site was also not 
observed.  Idling locomotives can be a source of polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in 
shallow soils, and there is the potential that spills may have occurred from rail cargo in this area.  
The April 2010 Phase II ESA confirmed the presence of PAHs in surface soil and remediation of 
these soils is described in the September 2, 2015 RAWP that was prepared by JCO. 
5.2	INTERIOR OBSERVATIONS
      The steel shed is located to the south of the main creamery building (near the former 
partially buried wastewater UST).  During the previous Phase I ESA walkover, drums of 
hazardous materials were noted in this building.  These drums were no longer present as of the 
August 26, 2017 walkover and reportedly have been transported off-site for appropriate disposal.  
However, as of the date of this report, formal disposal documentation has not been provided to 
JCO.  No staining or other evidence of releases were noted in this building.  
       
6.0  USER RESPONSIBILITIES
      In order to qualify for one of the Landowner Liability Protections (LLP) offered by the 
Small Business Liability Relief and Brownfields Revitalization Act of 2001, the user(s) and/or 
grantee(s) or a party on behalf of the user(s) and/or grantee(s) must collect the following 
information, if applicable, and should make the information available to the environmental 
professional upon request:
      
1.	Environmental cleanup liens that are filed or recorded against the Site;
2.	Activity and land use limitations that are in place on the Site or that have been 
filed or recorded in a registry;
3.	Specialized knowledge or experience of the person seeking to qualify for the 
Limited Liability Protections (LLPs);
4.	Relationship of the purchase price to the fair market value of the property if it 
were not contaminated;
5.	Commonly known or reasonably ascertainable information about the property; 
6.	The degree of obviousness of the presence or likely presence of contamination at 
the property and the ability to detect the contamination by appropriate 
investigation.

      The information listed above was addressed by Ms. Greta Brunswick of the Northwest 
Regional Planning Commission and Mr. Christopher Yates of the Town of Highgate, for which 
this ESA is being performed on behalf of. A copy of a completed User Questionnaires pertaining 
to the Site has been included with this report as Appendix 5.
7.0  CONCLUSIONS & OPINIONS
      JCO has performed a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment in accordance with the 
scope and limitations of ASTM Practice E-1527-13 of the former Saputo Cheese/Richmond 
Creamery site at 74 Jolina Court and 125 Bridge Street in Richmond, Vermont (the Site).  Any 
exception to, or deletions from, this practice are described in Section 8.1 of this report.  
      
      This assessment has revealed no evidence of recognized environmental conditions 
(RECs, CRECs, or HRECs) in connection with the property except for the following (see 
Sections 7.1, 7.2, and 7.3 below).
7.1	RECOGNIZED ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
      Based on review of the available data, JCO has identified the following RECs at the Site:

Known Soil Contamination: Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and metals were 
identified in surficial soils at concentrations above applicable soil screening levels during 
the 2010 Johnson Company Phase II ESA.  An Analysis of Brownfield Cleanup 
Alternatives (ABCA) and Remedial Action Work Plan (RAWP) has been prepared for 
the Site.  The actions detailed in these documents are currently being implemented at the 
Site.
Known Groundwater Contamination: Metals were detected in groundwater at 
concentrations above Vermont Groundwater Enforcement Standards (VGES) and a 
corrective action is detailed in the September 2015 RAWP.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
7.2	CONTROLLED RECOGNIZED ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS
      Based on review of the available data, JCO has not identified any CRECs at the Site.
7.3	HISTORIC RECOGNIZED ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITION (HREC)
      A HREC is defined by ASTM in the E1527-13 standard as "a past release of hazardous 
substance(s) that has been addressed to the satisfaction of the applicable regulatory authority or 
meeting unrestricted use criteria established by a regulatory authority, without subjecting the 
property to any required controls (for example, property use restrictions, activity and use 
limitations, institutional controls, or engineering controls)." HRECs are not considered RECs 
when the remaining environmental conditions are compliant with the most current regulatory 
criteria.  This assessment has revealed no evidence of HRECs in connection with the property.   
7.4	ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
	The following items are not formal RECs either because there is not sufficient 
information to reasonably suspect that a release of contamination has occurred or because they 
are beyond the scope ASTM 1527-13.  However it is the environmental professional's opinion 
that these items should be considered when making decisions regarding the redevelopment of the 
Site. 
Asbestos Containing Materials: The potential presence of asbestos-containing materials 
is beyond the scope of ASTM 1527-13.  However, it is the Environmental Professional's 
opinion that the section of cementitious pipe may be asbestos containing.  
Stained Soil Near the Former Fuel Oil AST: The patch of possibly stained soils is 
potentially an aged release, but does not appear to be related to the closure of the former 
#6 fuel oil AST.  It is the Environmental Professional's opinion that this constitutes a de 
minimis condition.
8.0  DATA GAPS/LIMITATIONS
8.1	DATA GAPS
      While the majority of the Site was inspected, dense vegetation around the perimeter of 
the Site made detailed inspection of the entire surface of the Site infeasible.  Because these areas 
were previously inspected and sampled during the Phase II ESA and during intervening Site 
walkovers, this data gap does not affect the conclusions of this report.
      
      The interior of the concrete well tower, which is approximately 15-20 feet tall, could not 
be safely accessed or inspected.  Photographs of the top of this tower, taken in June 2009, are 
included in Appendix 5.  This data gap does not affect the conclusions of this report.
8.2	LIMITATIONS
      The conclusions of this ESA were based upon information obtained and made available 
to JCO from the following sources: the Richmond Town Clerk; EDR; the VTDEC; the Federal 
EPA; and from information gathered during the Site reconnaissance and interviews.  This 
information has been intended for the sole use of Buttermilk Properties and Western Slopes 
Business Association.  No other uses, expressed or implied, are warranted.  The design of the 
investigation was based on sound scientific techniques and experience with similar 
investigations.  Should additional information become available pertaining to environmental 
concerns that may be associated with the Site, the information should be made available to JCO 
so that we may re-evaluate our conclusions.



