
The Johnson Company is pleased to present you with this report of our findings of a Phase I 
Environmental Site Assessment (ESA) of the Union Elementary School located at 1 Park 
Avenue in Montpelier, Vermont (the Site).  The Site consists of an approximately 3.4-acre parcel 
with a school building, playground, and courtyard.  The Site is listed as site management section 
(SMS) # 20104036 as a result of two heating oil releases.  The releases have reportedly been 
addressed and groundwater monitoring results indicate that contaminant concentrations are 
below the Vermont Groundwater Enforcement Standards.  This ESA was conducted in 
accordance with the scope and limitations of the American Society for Testing and Materials' 
(ASTM) Standard Practice for Environmental Site Assessments E 1527-13 in conformance with 
40 CFR Part 312, Standards and Practices for All Appropriate Inquiries. 
 
We appreciate being of assistance to you on this project.  Please do not hesitate to contact Kurt 
Muller should you have questions regarding the following information. 
 
Sincerely, 
THE JOHNSON COMPANY, INC. 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
The Johnson Company Inc. (JCO) of Montpelier, Vermont was retained by Montpelier School 
District to conduct a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment (ESA) of the Union Elementary 
School located at 1 Park Avenue in Montpelier, Vermont (the Site).  JCO understands that the 
purpose of this Phase I ESA is to provide environmental due diligence in support an application 
for brownfield assessment funding.  
 
The Site consists of a 3.4-acre parcel located in the southwest corner of the intersection of 
Hubbard Street and Park Avenue.  The Site is owned by the City of Montpelier.  The Site 
features consist of a school building, playground, driveway and courtyard. The current use of the 
Site is an elementary school and past uses of the Site have included a former high school and 
homestead.  The Site is listed as site management section (SMS) # 20104036 due to two fuel oil 
spills which occurred at the Site.  The first spill occurred when the delivery driver overfilled the 
275-gallon day tank in the boiler room, causing oil to flow out of the vent pipe onto the surface 
of the courtyard, along the building and into a small room located off the boiler room.  The 
second spill occurred in the crawl space below the northern corner of the building as a result of a 
leaking feed line from the UST located to the north of the building.  The response to both spills 
involved recovering the accessible free product and excavating the accessible impacted soil for 
off-site disposal.  A vapor barrier and vapor extraction system were also installed in connection 
with the second spill.  These areas were inspected during the Phase I ESA and no petroleum 
odors, sheens, or other evidence of residual contamination were noted. 
 
This ESA was performed by personnel from JCO who meet the definition of Environmental 
Professional as defined in 40 CFR Part 312.  This ESA included reviewing existing 
documentation, available aerial photographs and topographic maps, determining the regulatory 
status of the Site, contacting personnel regarding past and present uses of the Site, investigating 
the potential for past releases of petroleum products and/or hazardous substances at the Site, and 
conducting a site reconnaissance to visually inspect accessible portions of the Site to ascertain 
the presence of recognized environmental conditions (RECs) in the form of present or potential 
release(s) of hazardous substances or petroleum products. In addition, these sources were 
investigated for the presence of historic recognized environmental conditions (HRECs) – a past 
release of hazardous substance(s) that has been addressed to residential use standards or 
unrestricted use criteria – and controlled recognized environmental conditions (CREC) – a past 
release of hazardous substance(s) that has been addressed to non-residential use standards and is 
subject to some type of control – at the Site.  As such, a HREC is not a REC when the remaining 
environmental conditions are compliant with the most current regulatory criteria; and a CREC is 
a REC. 
 
JCO has performed this Phase I ESA in conformance with the scope and limitations of ASTM 
Practice E-1527-13 of the Union Elementary School located at 1 Park Avenue in Montpelier, 
Vermont.  Any exception to, or deletions from, this practice are described in Section 8.1 of this 
report.  This assessment has revealed no evidence of HRECs or CRECs.  This assessment has 
revealed no evidence of RECs in connection with the property except for the following:  
 
Two fuel oil releases occurred at the Site in 2009. The first (April 2009) was the result of 
an overfill from an exterior fill port in the courtyard and the second (December 2009) 
was from a leaking fuel feed line.  Although remedial action was initiated for both 
releases, it is likely that petroleum contaminated soil remains at depth in a portion of the 
earthen floor crawl space where the second release occurred.  Remedial action reportedly 
included the removal and offsite disposal of petroleum impacted soil and the installation 
of a vapor barrier and gravel layer to mitigate vapor intrusion and direct contact 
exposure.    Subsequent investigation (performed by Wheeler Environmental Services) 
did not identify groundwater contamination at concentrations in exceedance of Vermont 
Groundwater Enforcement Standards (VGES) in monitoring wells located outside the 
building near the spill area, nor was an immediate risk to sensitive receptors identified. 
Opinion:  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that these known releases of 
petroleum products constitutes a REC.  However, based on the available information it 
does not appear likely that substantial petroleum contamination has migrated from the 
area in the school’s basement that was reportedly most impacted by the release. 
 
This 2017 preliminary soil assessment for off-site disposal planning purposes identified 
PAHs at concentrations above the former and current Vermont Department of Health 
(VDH) residential screening level (0.01 mg/kg and 0.07 mg/g, respectively); arsenic at 
concentrations above the former industrial screening level (3.0 mg/kg), but below the 
Vermont background value (16 mg/kg); and lead at concentrations below the former and 
current residential screening level (400 mg/kg).  While the PAH concentrations 
encountered are below the Vermont urban background concentration (0.58 mg/kg) and 
the arsenic concentrations are below the State-wide background value, the disposal precharacterization
sampling was performed using a composite sample protocol (preferred 
by the receiving facility), so the extent of impact could not be determined.  Importation of 
fill is a potential source of this contamination as well as previous fires which may have 
occurred. Opinion:  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that the confirmed 
presence of PAHs, arsenic, and lead from the limited soil assessment constitutes a REC.  
If additional information regarding the presence of PAHs, arsenic, and lead at the Site is 
desired, further soil sample collection may be warranted.  
 
Floor drains with discharge points that have not been confirmed (although reportedly are 
connected to the municipal sewer) are in the boiler room.  These drains may have 
accepted fuel oil during the April 2009 spill which occurred in the basement or from 
incidental spills when servicing the boilers, etc.  Opinion:  It is the Environmental 
Professional’s opinion that if these drains are not connected to the municipal sewer the 
presence of these floor drains in the boiler room may have exacerbated the 2009 fuel oil 
releases.  Should additional information be desired, the connection to the municipal 
sewer should be confirmed and analytical sample collection from the drains or 
surrounding subsurface may be warranted. 
 
A variety of “household” hazardous chemicals (paints, cleaners, etc.) were identified at 
the Site.  Good housekeeping practices were noted in connection with these chemicals. 
Opinion:  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that there is only a slight chance 
of contamination associated with the presence of containerized hazardous chemicals at 
the Site.  However, if additional information regarding these chemicals is desired then a 
hazardous waste inventory may be warranted.   
 
The following items are beyond the scope of a Phase I ESA (as defined by ASTM 1527-13) and 
therefore are not considered formal RECs; however, these items should be considered during any 
future investigation, construction, or renovation planning: 
 
The presence of asbestos-containing building materials, lead-based paint, and/or PCBcontaining
building materials is beyond the scope of ASTM 1527-13.  However, the 
presence of these materials has been confirmed in the School building.  School facilities 
maintenance staff are familiar with the presence of these materials and according to Mr. 
Wood these materials are being actively managed. Opinion:  It is the Environmental 
Professional’s opinion that, based on the information provided by Mr. Thom Wood, the 
asbestos, lead paint, and PCB building materials are being managed in accordance with 
approved plans.   
1.0  INTRODUCTION 
The Johnson Company Inc. (JCO), of Montpelier, Vermont was retained by the 
Montpelier School District to conduct a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment (ESA) of the 
Union Elementary School located at 1 Park Avenue in Montpelier, Vermont (the Site).  The 
location of the Site is depicted in Figure 1.  
 
The purpose of this ESA was to identify Recognized Environmental Conditions (RECs) 
associated with the Site that may suggest the presence or likely presence of hazardous substances 
or petroleum products resulting from conditions associated with an existing release, past release, 
or a material threat of a release at the property.  JCO understands that the school is planning to 
perform construction to update the courtyard, playground, upper ballfield, and steep bank 
portions of the Site, and is interested in pursuing brownfield assessment funding from Central 
Vermont Regional Planning Commission (CVRPC) to investigate the soil quality in the areas 
which will be disturbed during construction (see Figure 2).   
   
This ESA included reviewing existing information made available and/or that was 
reasonably ascertainable regarding current and past usage of the property, determining the Site’s 
regulatory status, contacting appropriate personnel regarding current and past uses of the Site, 
investigating past, present and/or the potential for releases of hazardous substances at the Site, 
and conducting a reconnaissance to visually inspect the accessible portions of the Site.   
 
This ESA was performed by personnel from JCO who meet the definition of 
Environmental Professional as defined in 40 CFR Part 312, in conformance within the scope and 
limitations of ASTM E 1527-13 in compliance with 40 CFR Part 312, Standards and Practices 
for All Appropriate Inquiries.   
 
Credentials of JCO personnel involved with the preparation of this ESA are included as 
Appendix 1. 
2.0 SITE DESCRIPTION 
The Site consists of a 3.4-acre parcel located southwest corner of the intersection of 
Hubbard Street and Park Avenue.  The Site is owned by the City of Montpelier.  The Site 
structures consist of a school building, playground, driveway and courtyard. The current use of 
the Site is an elementary school.  Based on the Montpelier land records, the first use of the Site 
was as a homestead in the mid-1800’s (see Section 3.2.4 for additional details).  In the latter 
portion of the 1800’s, a high school was constructed at the Site and was present until the mid1900’s
when it reportedly was destroyed by fire and the current school building was constructed.  
The Site is listed as site management section (SMS) # 20104036 due to two fuel oil spills which 
both occurred in 2009 (see Section 3.3).  Figure 2 shows the location of the Site relative to its 
surroundings.   
2.1 SETTING AND SURROUNDING DEVELOPMENT 
The Site hosts a school building, playground, and courtyard. The Site is abutted to the 
southeast by Hubbard Street, to the southwest by residential properties, to the northwest by a 
residential property and Loomis Street, and to the northeast by Park Avenue.  The Site and 
surrounding properties are depicted on Figure 2. 
 
Much of the Site is covered with the current school building.  Steep banks are present to 
the southeast (covered with short grass) and southwest (covered with trees and brush).  
Generally, the areas that comprise the courtyard, playground, and upper ballfield have been 
graded flat; however steep upward sloping banks are present beyond the courtyard to the 
southwest and upper ballfield to the southeast.   
 
Currently, the building hosts an elementary school and related activities.  Except for a 
Baptist Church located north of the Site, the host vicinity is predominantly residential.  No 
known historical industrial operations were identified at the Site. 
2.2 HEATING, WATER AND SEWER 
The school building is heated by “district heat” – hot water from the district is pumped to 
the Site, and heat exchangers are used to transfer the heat to the building.  The building has oil 
furnaces as a backup heat source.  Historically, the old high school building formerly located in 
the eastern portion of the Site, near the current upper ballfield and playground, was reportedly 
heated with coal. 
 
Water for the school is supplied from the City of Montpelier and wastewater from the 
school is discharged into the City of Montpelier sewer system.   
 
Electricity to the property is provided by Green Mountain Power via overhead lines.  No 
transformers were noted at the Site. 
2.3 GEOLOGY AND HYDROGEOLOGY 
The Site soils are mapped as Udipsamments sand which is a coarse-grained, poorly 
graded, non-hydric, soil (EDR, 2017).  The bedrock in the area is mapped as the Waits River 
Formation, a Lower Devonian and Upper Silurian phyllite metalimestone described as “Darkgray
to silvery-gray, lustrous, carbonaceous muscovite-biotite-quartz (+/-garnet) phyllite 
containing abundant beds of punky-brown-weathering, dark-bluish-gray micaceous quartz-rich 
limestone in beds ranging from 10 cm to 10 m thick” (Ratcliffe, et al, 2011).  
 
The direction of groundwater flow was not directly measured as part of this ESA.  Water 
level measurements were collected during a groundwater investigation that was performed by 
Wheeler Environmental Services to evaluate the 2009 fuel oil spill (see Section 3.3.1); however, 
the January 26, 2011 report for this investigation suggested anomalous water level measurements 
and stated that “we suspect that an underground utility trench in the area may be interfering with 
the natural elevations of the groundwater in this area”.  Based on the surrounding topography 
and the presence of the Winooski River (~1,400 feet west of the Site) and the North Branch of 
the Winooski River (~1,100 feet north of the Site), the overall groundwater flow in the area is 
expected to be to the north or northwest. 
2.4 THREATENED SPECIES AND WETLANDS 
Vermont Agency of Natural Resources (VTANR) Natural Resources Atlas (NRA) does 
not show any wetlands located within approximately 0.25-mile of the Site.  The VTANR NRA 
shows 64 other wetlands located between 0.25- and 1-mile of the Site (VTDEC1, 2017). 
 
The VTANR NRA does not list any rare, threatened or endangered species, uncommon 
species, or significant natural communities within 0.25-mile of the nearest Site boundary.  The 
VTANR NRA lists three rare threatened or endangered species between 0.25-mile and 1.0-mile 
of the nearest Site boundary.   These endangered species appear to be either associated with the 
Winooski River or a patch of wooded land approximately 1,500-feet to the southwest of the Site 
(VTDEC1, 2017). 
3.0 SITE HISTORY AND REVIEW OF EXISTING INFORMATION 
3.1 HISTORICAL REVIEW 
3.1.1 Land Records 
A search of the Land Records in the Montpelier City Clerk’s office was conducted on 
June 26, 2017.  It should be noted that JCO staff are not title search professionals; a formal land 
records review should be conducted by a qualified title search attorney.  Details of historical 
ownership of the Site are summarized in Table 1.   
3.1.2 U.S.G.S. Topographic Maps 
The 1919, 1921, 1924, 1944, 1968, 1999, and 2012 United States Geological Survey 
(USGS) topographic quadrangle maps for the target area were provided by Environmental Data 
Resources, Inc. (EDR) and reviewed as part of this ESA (EDR, 2017). Map series were 15minute
(1919, 1921, 1924, and 1944), and 7.5 minute (1968, 1999, and 2012).  The maps are 
included as Appendix 2.  The “school” symbol is shown at the Site in the 1919 through 1944 
maps, which is presumably the former high school.  A structure with the approximate footprint 
of the current school building is shown in the 1968 and 1999 maps.  Another “school” symbol is 
shown to the south of the Site (near the intersection of East State Street and Hubbard Street) in 
the 1919 through 1999 maps.  The 2012 map shows streets and elevation contours only, but does 
not include information regarding the presence of any specific structures or the development 
status of a particular area. 
3.1.3 Aerial Photographs 
Aerial photographs from 1942, 1960, 1966, 1973, 1976, 1986, 1992, 1996, 2006, 2009, 
2011, and 2012 were provided by EDR and reviewed as part of this ESA. The aerial photos are 
included as Appendix 2.  Except for the southern-most wing of the building (the location of the 
current cafeteria), the bulk of the current school building appears to be present in the 1942 
through 1976 photographs.  The quality of the 1986 photograph is poor, but the location of the 
current cafeteria within the structure appears to be present in this photograph.  The Site appears 
in its approximate current configuration in the 1992 though 2012 photographs. 
3.1.4 Sanborn Fire Insurance Maps 
Historical Sanborn Fire Insurance Maps for 1889, 1894, 1899, 1905, 1909, 1915, 1925, 
1945, and 1964 were provided by EDR and is included in Appendix 2.  A structure labeled 
variously “High School” (in earlier maps) and “Public School” (later maps) is shown on the 1889 
through 1945 maps at a location to the southeast of the current school building, in the vicinity of 
the current playground.  The area to the south of the High School is blank in the 1889 map and 
labeled “vacant hillside” in the 1894 and 1899 maps.  A “shed” appears to the south of the High 
School structure in the 1894 map and is present through 1945.  A structure labeled “Graded 
School” appears to the southwest of the Site in the 1905 map.  This structure is present in all 
subsequent maps and is labeled “Public School” in the 1915 and 1925 maps and “St. Michaels 
Parochial School” in the 1945 and 1964 maps.  A Baptist church is shown to the northwest of the 
Site in all maps.  All other structures in the immediate vicinity of the Site are shown as dwellings 
in all maps. 
3.1.5 City Directories 
The Mannings street directories and Cole Information Services street directories for the 
Site were provided by EDR (see Appendix 2).  The 1961, 1967, 1973, 1992, 1995, 1999, 2003, 
2008, and 2013 directories were reviewed.  The 1961 through 1995 directories list the Union 
Elementary School at the Site.  The 1999 through 2013 directories do not have a listing for the 
Site. 
3.1.6 Environmental Questionnaire 
JCO’s standard Environmental Questionnaire was provided to Mr. Thom Wood, 
Montpelier School District Director of Facilities, on June 20, 2017.  Mr. Wood returned the 
completed questionnaire to JCO on August 7, 2017.  The completed Environmental 
Questionnaire has been included as Appendix 3 of this report.  
3.2 INTERVIEWS 
3.2.1 Current Owner 
Mr. Thom Wood accompanied JCO staff on the June 26, 2017 Site visit, and answered 
questions regarding environmental conditions at the Site to the best of his ability.  
3.2.2 Past Owner/Occupant 
Based on review of the land records, the Site has been owned by the City of  Montpelier 
since circa 1857.  The past owner/occupant was not interviewed as part of this ESA. 
3.2.3 State/Local Officials 
The Montpelier Police Department was contacted on July 7, 2017, and spoke with 
Dispatch Supervisor Fred Cummings.  When asked if he had any knowledge of spills, complaints 
of dumping, or other incidences involving human health or the environment, Mr. Cummings 
stated that the Montpelier Police Department would be responsible for such calls, and referred 
the questions to the Fire Department.  (Cummings, 2017). 
On July 7, 2017 Lieutenant Sharron of the Montpelier Fire Department (13-years tenure 
with the fire department) was asked if he had any knowledge spills, complaints of dumping, or 
other incidences involving human health or the environment at the Site.  Lieutenant Sharron 
indicated he was not aware of any specific environmental concerns or complaints at the Site 
(Montpelier FD, 2017). 
3.2.4 Neighboring or Nearby Property Owner/Occupant    
On July 25, 2017 Mr. Andrew Shuford (neighboring property owner of 10 Park Avenue) 
was interviewed regarding the Site by Mr. Jeremy Matt of JCO.  Mr. Shuford, who has owned 
this property since 2009, identified that he was not aware of any spills, complaints of dumping, 
or other incidences that would be of concern to human health or the environment at the Site 
(Shuford, 2017).  
 
On July 27, 2017 Mr. Jeremy Matt of JCO contacted the Vermont Economic 
Development Authority (VEDA; neighboring property owner to the west) and spoke with Ms. Jo 
Bradley (Chief Executive Officer; 20-years tenure).  Ms. Bradley said that VEDA has owned the 
property they currently occupy for approximately 10-years and that she was not aware of any 
spills, complaints of dumping, or other incidences that would be of concern to human health or 
the environment at the Site (Bradley, 2017). 
 
3.3 PRIOR INVESTIGATIONS 
3.3.1 Ongoing Building Materials 
Management Activities    
Prior to conducting this Phase I ESA, testing (not performed by JCO) has confirmed the 
presence of asbestos-containing materials (ACM), lead-based paint, and PCB-containing 
building materials in the school building.  Additional information regarding this testing and the 
findings are presented below.  
 
Asbestos 
 An asbestos management plan was developed for the school building in October 1988 by 
Crothers Environmental Group of Hardwick, Vermont.  This plan identified ACM in accessible 
areas including pipe insulation in the boiler room and crawl spaces and troweled on plaster on 
the hallway ceilings; however, the assessment did not evaluate the potential for ACM above 
permanent ceilings or within walls.  The condition of these materials that were tested for ACM 
were assessed, and materials which were considered to pose an immediate risk (such as the ACM 
in the boiler room and crawl spaces) were abated (VTDOH, 1988).  Other materials, such as the 
hallway ceiling plaster, were considered to be in good condition and have not yet been abated.  
According to Mr. Thom Wood (Director of Facilities), the school is actively following the 
requirements of the asbestos management plan, including periodic inspections of materials with 
known ACM.  Also, according to Mr. Wood, when performing maintenance and upgrades, the 
presence of ACM is accounted for and managed appropriately by licensed asbestos professional.   
 
Lead Based Paint 
According to Mr. Thom Wood, the exterior paint on certain window sashes looking out 
onto the courtyard area are painted with lead based paint.  Mr. Wood indicated that the school 
has replaced a portion of the window sashes in the courtyard area with aluminum sashes to 
remove the lead-based paint and has plans to stabilize the lead paint on the remaining window 
sashes.  Mr. Wood indicated that this work was being done by a Vermont licensed lead inspector 
with oversight from the VTDEC.   
 
PCB Building Materials 
During the Site walkover, Mr. Thom Wood indicated that PCB-containing roofing 
materials were encountered during replacement of the roof.  According to Mr. Wood the PCB 
containing materials which impeded installation of the replacement roof were appropriately 
abated and disposed of, but other PCB containing roofing materials (primarily around the edge of 
the roof on the parapets) were not removed and remain. 
3.3.2 April and December 2009 Fuel Spills  
On April 4, 2009, a fuel oil odor was noted in the basement of the school, and it was 
found that oil had come out a vent pipe during a fuel oil delivery to the Site.  According to the 
VTANR spill report, the responsible party was Abenaki Carriers.  The spill report also indicated 
that oil had run down the building foundation wall and into a small basement room located off 
the boiler room.  This spill resulted in contamination of an approximately 12x12 foot area of the 
exterior courtyard around the vent pipe.  Crothers Environmental reportedly took steps to recover 
oil from the basement and excavated a total of 39 tons of petroleum contaminated soils which 
were transported off-site for disposal at the Moretown landfill; however, according to the 
VTANR spill report some impacted material remained.  During the April 2017 Preliminary Soil 
Investigation (see Section 3.3.2 below) JCO advanced a boring near the vent and fill pipes.  No 
evidence of petroleum impacts was noted in this area. 
 
 On December 31, 2009 fuel oil was discovered in a basement crawlspace at the school 
because of a leaking interior fuel feed line.  According to the VTANR spills database, an 
estimated 500-1000 gallons of fuel oil were released.  ENPRO Services, Inc. arrived shortly after 
the spill was reported and removed approximately 300 gallons of fuel oil and approximately 5 
cubic yards of impacted soil from the crawlspace.  A vapor recovery system was installed to 
mitigate vapor intrusion from the soils into the crawlspace in the area where the fuel oil was 
released.  Mr. Thom Wood was asked about the discrepancy between the estimated volume of 
the spill and the volume of oil recovered.  Mr. Wood indicated that he was not sure who came up 
with the release volume estimate, or how they arrived at that number as there was no flow 
metering on the feed line from the UST at that time.   
 
In 2010, Wheeler Environmental Services, LLC conducted an initial site investigation to 
characterize the degree and extent of potential petroleum impacts to soil and groundwater at the 
Site that resulted from these two spills.  On April 20, 2010, six soil borings were advanced, two 
in the crawlspace where the release was discovered and four surrounding the underground 
storage tank (UST) to which the leaking fuel feed line was attached.  Monitoring wells were 
installed in each of the six soil borings.  Soil samples were not collected from the six soil borings 
and photoionization detector (PID) headspace readings from the four exterior soil borings were 
all below 2 parts per million by volume (ppmV) indicating little to no petroleum impacts to the 
soil outside the school building.  Groundwater samples were collected on May 4, 2010 from each 
of the six monitoring wells and were submitted for volatile organic carbon (VOC) analysis and 
total petroleum hydrocarbons.   VOCs in groundwater were not detected at concentrations in any 
of the six groundwater samples that exceeded the Vermont Groundwater Enforcement Standards 
(VGES).  However, it should be noted that the top of screen elevations for all the monitoring 
wells were below the water table on the date of sampling and therefore any floating product may 
have been missed during sampling.  A follow-up groundwater sampling event has been 
recommended to confirm the lack of VOCs in groundwater and to verify that potential 
contaminants are not migrating along the groundwater interface.  Additional information 
regarding the remediation activities and subsequent investigation related to these fuel oil releases 
are presented in January 26, 2011 Investigation Report prepared by Wheeler Environmental 
Services, LLC, which is included as Appendix 4 of this Phase I ESA.  
3.3.3 April 2017 Preliminary Soil Investigation    
On February 28, 2017, JCO advanced 10 soil borings at the Property to total depths 
between 3 feet below ground surface (fbgs) and 6 fbgs.  This investigation was conducted in 
support of redevelopment of a portion of the exterior of the Site and was intended to obtain soil 
quality data for use when evaluating disposal options for excess soil likely to be generated during 
construction activities.  The soil extracted from these borings was composited into four 
composite samples and sent for analysis of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), semi-VOCs 
(SVOCs), the RCRA-8 list of metals (arsenic, barium, cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury, 
selenium, and silver), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), pesticides, herbicides, cyanide/sulfide 
reactivity, total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH), and corrosivity.   This 2017 preliminary soil 
assessment for off-site disposal planning purposes identified PAHs (expressed as a 
benzo(a)pyrene toxicity equivalence, BaP-TE) at concentrations above the former and current 
Vermont Department of Health (VDH) residential screening level (0.01 mg/kg and 0.07 mg/g, 
respectively); arsenic at concentrations above the former industrial screening level (3.0 mg/kg), 
but below the Vermont background value (16 mg/kg); and lead at concentrations below the 
former and current residential screening level (400 mg/kg).  While the BaP-TE concentrations 
encountered are below the Vermont urban background concentration (0.58 mg/kg) and the 
arsenic concentrations are below the State-wide background value, the disposal precharacterization
sampling was performed using a composite sample protocol (preferred by the 
receiving facility), so the extent of impact could not be determined by the limited initial 
characterization effort.  Following review of this preliminary soil characterization data and 
discussion with the VTDEC, it was determined that additional assessment of the Site would be 
required to further delineate PAHs, lead, and arsenic in soil.  This additional assessment is 
scheduled to occur in August/September 2017.  
4.0 REGULATORY STATUS 
4.1 ENVIRONMENTAL LIENS 
 A search of the files at the Montpelier Town Clerk’s office on June 26, 2017 revealed no 
environmental liens on the property.  However, it should be noted that JCO are not title 
attorneys. 
4.2 FEDERAL REGULATORY FILES 
 A database radius search report was provided by EDR (EDR, 2017).  The information 
presented in the following sub-sections was taken from the EDR report.  If the EDR results 
suggest that a more detailed evaluation of a particular property or regulatory category is 
warranted due to its potential risk to the Site, then the rationale for the evaluation and additional 
information related to the particular property will be detailed below.  Otherwise, all information 
provided in this section was obtained from the EDR Radius Map Report. The EDR Radius Map 
Report is included as Appendix 2. 
4.2.1 Federal National Priority List (NPL) 
The Site is not listed on the National Priority List (NPL), i.e., Superfund site, nor is any 
property within a one-mile search radius of the Site. 
4.2.1.1 Delisted NPL sites  
  Neither the Site nor any other properties within the one-mile search radius are 
delisted NPL sites. 
4.2.2 Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Information 
System (CERCLIS) List or Superfund Enterprise Management System (SEMS) 
The CERCLIS list was renamed SEMS in 2015.  The Site does not appear on the 
CERCLIS or SEMS databases.  One site (Franklin Street Area) is listed approximately 0.2 miles 
north of the Site (see Section 4.3.1).  No other listed CERCLIS sites were identified within a 0.5mile
search radius of the Site. 
4.2.2.1 No Further Remedial Action Planned Site List (SEMS-ARCHIVE) 
Neither the Site nor any sites within a 0.5-mile search radius are on the SEMSARCHIVE
list. 
4.2.3 Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Generators 
The Site is listed as a conditionally exempt small quantity generator (CESQG) and five 
additional CESQGs are located within 0.25-mile of the Site. 
4.2.3.1 RCRA Corrective Action Sites (CORRACTS) List 
The Site is not on the list of RCRA Corrective Action sites for EPA Region 1, nor 
is any property within a one-mile search radius of the Site. 
4.2.4 RCRA Treatment, Storage and Disposal (TSD) Facilities 
There are no transportation and disposal (TSD) facilities listed within a 0.5-mile search 
radius of the Site. 
4.2.5 Federal Institutional Control/Engineering Registries 
There are no federally-registered controls within a 0.5-mile search radius of the Site. 
4.2.6 Federal Emergency Response Notification (ERNS) List 
 The EDR radius report did not identify any records of spills at the Site in the ERNS 
database.  However, two spills occurred at the Site (see Section 4.3.1 for additional details). 
4.2.7 EPA On-Scene Coordinator Emergency Environmental Response 
The EPA On-scene Coordinator (OSC) program performs rapid responses to remove 
direct contact risks by trespassers or the public.  The EPA OSC records are not part of the 
standard EDR database search, therefore JCO conducted a separate search of OSC records.  As 
of July 12, 2017, no OSC sites were listed within a one-mile search radius of the Site (EPAOSC, 
2017).  However, the site investigation report for the Franklin Street Area site indicates that the 
investigation of the Site included OSC involvement (see Section 4.3.1 for additional details). 
 
4.3 STATE/TRIBAL REGULATORY FILES 
 There are no recognized tribal or American Indian-owned lands within Vermont; 
therefore, no tribal files were searched during this ESA. 
4.3.1 Hazardous Sites List 
Based on JCO’s review of the EDR Radius Map Report and on a search of the VTANR 
NRA, the Site is listed as a low priority hazardous waste site with SMS # 2010-4036 (see Section 
3.3 for additional details), due to the two previously discussed fuel oil releases.  In addition, 26 
hazardous waste sites are located with 0.25-mile of the nearest Site boundary (VTDEC1, 2017).  
Of the 26 hazardous waste sites, 2 are listed as medium priority sites, 7 are listed as low priority 
sites, and the remaining 18 sites are closed with either Site Management Activity Complete 
(SMAC), No Further Remedial Action Planned (NFRAP), or Certificate of Completion (COC) 
status.  An additional 51 hazardous waste sites are located between 0.25-mile and 1-mile of the 
Site.  Based on the intervening distance, degree and type of contamination, review of the 
surrounding topography, and on the presence of nearby surface water features, several hazardous 
waste sites of interest were identified near the Site, which are discussed in more detail below. 
 
4 Franklin Street (Franklin Street Area) SMS#: 770139 
The Franklin Street area was listed as a hazardous waste Site as a result of subsurface soil 
impacts that were identified in 1977.  Historical records indicated that a tannery was formerly 
located at this site.  On April 7, 1995, OSC and Roy F. Weston, Inc. conducted an investigation 
of the Franklin Street site.  Coal ash and clinkers were identified in hand auger borings and soil 
samples were collected and sent for laboratory analysis of metals and SVOC (Weston, 1995).  
The analytical results of this sampling were not available in the records reviewed by JCO, but the 
VTDEC assigned the Site low priority, which suggests that a significant impact to sensitive 
receptors was not identified (VTDEC1, 2017).  Based on the intervening distance between 
Franklin Street and MUES (approximately 1,600-feet north of MUES), the proximity of the 
North Branch of the Winooski River (less than 200-feet northwest of Franklin Street), probable 
groundwater flow directions, and the contaminants of concern at the Franklin Street site, it is 
considered unlikely that contamination from this site has impacted the MUES Site. 
 
NET Montpelier SMS#: 931418 
NET Montpelier was listed as a hazardous waste site because of petroleum contamination 
encountered during removal of a 3,000-gallon fuel oil UST and one 500-gallon diesel fuel UST 
that were removed on June 23, 1993.  NET Montpelier is located approximately 700-feet 
northwest (and presumably down-gradient) of the Site.  Approximately 20-cubic yards of 
petroleum contaminated soils were stockpiled on-site and subsequently sent for disposal at the 
Waste USA landfill in Coventry, Vermont.  Groundwater sampling at the site did not identify 
any groundwater concentrations that exceeded the VGES, and subsequently the site was granted 
Sites Management Activity Complete (SMAC) status by VTDEC in July 1994 (VTDEC, 1994). 
4.3.2 Underground Storage Tank List 
The Site is not a registered UST facility; however; one 10,000-gallon UST is located 
outside the building footprint near the northwest corner of the Site.  No abutting properties are 
listed as UST facilities (VTDEC1, 2017).  
4.3.3 Spills List 
Both the EDR report and the Natural Resources Atlas identified two spills at the Site 
(EDR, 2017; VTDEC1, 2017).  See Section 3.3 for additional details. 
4.3.4 Landfills 
There are no certified landfills within a 0.5-mile search radius of the Site. 
4.3.5 Institutional Controls/Engineering Controls Registries 
A review of the records available at the Montpelier City Clerk’s office revealed no 
institutional and/or engineering controls filed in the Land Records for the Site as of June 26, 
2017.   
4.3.6 Voluntary Cleanup Sites 
Vermont does not specifically have a voluntary cleanup program, but the Brownfield 
Reuse Environmental Liability Limitation Act (BRELLA, effective July 1, 2008), acts as one for 
non-responsible parties.  A total of six Brownfield sites are located within 0.5-mile of the nearest 
Site boundary. 
4.3.7 Brownfield Sites 
The Site is in the process of enrolling in the Brownfield Cleanup Program.  A total of six 
Brownfield sites are located within 0.5-mile of the nearest Site boundary. 
4.4 LOCAL REGULATORY FILES  
4.4.1 Fire Department/Town Health Officer/Police 
Details regarding interviews with local officials are provided in Section 3.2.3. 
4.4.2 Local Electric Utility Company (Polychlorinated biphenyls) 
 Electricity to the property was served by Green Mountain Power via overhead lines.  No 
power poles with transformers were identified at the Site. 
4.5 EDR HIGH-RISK DATABASE 
 The EDR high-risk database identified former two dry cleaners within 1/10th of a mile of 
the Site.  These properties are Denoia’s Cleaners located at 50 East State Street (approximately 
150 feet west southwest of the Site and potentially hydraulically up-gradient or cross-gradient) 
and Belanger’s Cleaning Service located at 28 East State Street (approximately 400-feet west 
and presumably cross-gradient or down-gradient of the Site).  JCO understands that neither of 
these businesses still operate on East State Street, nor are listed hazardous waste sites and no 
record of investigation of either of these properties was found. 
  
 The EDR High-Risk Database also identified the Montpelier Gas Works, a former 
manufactured gas plant, located approximately 0.35 miles west of the Site (near the confluence 
of the North Branch and the Winooski Rivers and presumably down-gradient of the Site).  This 
property does not appear to be a listed hazardous waste Site and no record of any investigation 
was found. 
5.0 SITE RECONNAISSANCE 
A Site walkover was conducted on June 26, 2017 by Jeremy Matt and Stephen Hilfiker of 
JCO.  Mr. Thom Wood (Director of Facilities) accompanied Mr. Matt and Mr. Hilfiker during 
the exterior and some of the interior Site walkover.  The weather conditions on the day of the 
Site visit were partly cloudy, approximately 60 degrees F.  Photographs taken during the Site 
visit are included as Appendix 5 of this report.   
5.1 EXTERIOR OBSERVATIONS 
The exterior portions of the Site consist of a playground to the southeast of the building, a 
steep grassy bank to the southeast of the playground, a courtyard on the southwest side of the 
building, a steep wooded bank to the southwest of the courtyard, and grassy lawn areas on the 
northeast and northwest sides of the building.  The courtyard is surrounded on three sides by the 
building.  The ground surface of the playground and courtyard is predominantly fine gravel and 
sand with some grassy areas and paved walkways.  During the walkover of the exterior portion 
of the Site, one set of vent and fill pipes were noted near the northwest corner of the courtyard 
which were connected to a 275-gallon fuel oil above ground storage tank (AST) located in the 
boiler room.  Another pair of vent and fill ports in a concrete pad associated with a 10,000-gallon 
UST were noted in the grassy area between the northwest corner of the building and the 
intersection of Loomis Street and Park Avenue.  Four monitoring wells were noted at locations 
surrounding the UST.  No staining or stressed vegetation was noted near these pipes or concrete 
pad.   
During the walkover, Mr. Wood indicated that approximately half of the exterior window 
sills facing the courtyard had been renovated to remove lead-based paint.  Mr. Wood indicated 
that during renovation paint chip scrapings had been collected by placing polyethylene sheeting 
below the work area.  The remaining window sills in the courtyard are planned to be renovated 
during the summer of 2017, while school is in recess.  Renovation of the windows on the exterior 
of the rest of the building is planned for the summer of 2018. 
5.2 INTERIOR OBSERVATIONS 
 The interior portions of the Site consist of a two-story school with a sub-grade basement 
and attic.  The school is divided into: classrooms, offices, storage closets, gymnasium, a 
cafeteria, an auditorium, an “attic” crawlspace, and a sub-grade basement.   
 
The classrooms, offices, storage closets, gymnasium, cafeteria, and auditorium contain 
school supplies and furniture.  Other than typical household items (cleaning products, etc.), no 
evidence of potentially hazardous items was noted in the aforementioned spaces and good 
housekeeping practices were observed during the Site walkover.  During the Site walkover, Mr. 
Wood indicated that the textured ceilings in the hallways were suspected of containing asbestos.  
The ceiling appeared to be in good condition, with no observed loose material.  The presence of 
asbestos at the Site is discussed in more detail in Section 3.3.1.  Mr. Wood indicated that 
Crothers Environmental Group had conducted an ACM investigation and that the Union 
Elementary School had an on-going asbestos management plan in place. 
The attic was inspected from the access ladder, and appeared to contain utility piping and 
fiberglass insulation.  According to Todd, the school maintenance supervisor, the attic was only 
used as a utility chase and was only accessed if there was a maintenance problem. 
 
The basement below the school has a concrete floor in the maintenance offices, utility 
room, and storage rooms and an earthen floor in the crawlspaces.  The soils in portions of the 
crawl spaces were not visible during the Site walkover as they were covered in polyethylene 
sheeting reportedly from a pipe insulation asbestos remediation project that had occurred circa 
1990.  The earthen floor, where visible, was inspected and no sheens, odors, or other evidence of 
contamination was noted.  The reportedly area impacted by the second fuel oil spill is in a 
crawlspace “room” at the northeast corner of the building.  The area where the spill occurred was 
covered with poly sheeting at the time of the walkover (see Photograph 18 in Appendix 5).  No 
sheens on the poly or odors were noted in this area.  The crawlspaces are empty except for utility 
conduits hanging from the ceiling.  Considering this poly was presumably serving as a vapor 
barrier, JCO did not pierce the plastic to inspect soils below.  The walls of the basement are 
constructed of cinder-blocks.  The basement contains heat converters for the district heating (hot 
water pumped to the building from a central boiler), two fuel oil boilers as backup heat, a 275gallon
fuel oil AST, a number paint cans, and a collection of non-hazardous items (school 
supplies, furniture, tools, etc.).  The AST appeared to be in good condition, and no odors, 
staining, or other evidence of releases was noted in this area. 
 
Several floor drains in the concrete slab in the boiler room were noted.  Todd indicated 
that the floor drains discharge to the municipal sewer system.  Mr. Wood indicated that he would 
look for facilities plans that would confirm the discharge location, but as of the date of this report 
those plans have not been provided.  A sump pump was installed and was observed to be 
operating in an opening in the concrete floor.  No odors were noted emanating from the sump 
and no sheens were observed.  JCO also inspected the room in the basement which accepted oil 
from the April 2009 fuel oil overflow spill (located near the boiler room).  Inspection was 
hampered by the door to this area, which was partially rusted shut.  The area appeared to contain 
a few trash cans (one of which contained a number of incandescent light bulbs).  No odors were 
noted emanating from this area. 
 
6.0 USER RESPONSIBILITIES 
To qualify for one of the Landowner Liability Protections (LLP) offered by the Small 
Business Liability Relief and Brownfields Revitalization Act of 2001, the user(s) and/or 
grantee(s) or a party on behalf of the user(s) and/or grantee(s) must collect the following 
information, if applicable, and should make the information available to the environmental 
professional upon request: 
 
1. Environmental cleanup liens that are filed or recorded against the Site; 
2. Activity and land use limitations that are in place on the Site or that have been 
filed or recorded in a registry; 
3. Specialized knowledge or experience of the person seeking to qualify for the 
Limited Liability Protections (LLPs); 
4. Relationship of the purchase price to the fair market value of the property if it 
were not contaminated; 
5. Commonly known or reasonably ascertainable information about the property;  
6. The degree of obviousness of the presence or likely presence of contamination at 
the property and the ability to detect the contamination by appropriate 
investigation. 
 
The User’s Questionnaire was provided to Mr. Thom Wood of the Montpelier School 
District, for which this ESA is being performed on behalf of. The complete questionnaire has 
been included as Appendix 5 of this report. 
7.0 CONCLUSIONS & OPINIONS 
JCO has performed a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment in conformance with the 
scope and limitations of ASTM Practice E-1527 of the Union Elementary School located at 1 
Park Avenue in Montpelier, Vermont (the Site).  Any exception to, or deletions from, this 
practice are described in Section 8.1 of this report.  This assessment has revealed no evidence of 
historical recognized environmental conditions (HRECs) or controlled recognized environmental 
conditions (CRECS) in connection with the Site.   
 
7.1 RECOGNIZED ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS  
This assessment has revealed no evidence of recognized environmental conditions 
(RECs) in connection with the property except for the following:    
 
Two fuel oil releases occurred at the Site in 2009. The first (April 2009) was the result of 
an overfill from an exterior fill port in the courtyard and the second (December 2009) 
was from a leaking fuel feed line.  Although remedial action was initiated for both 
releases, it is likely that petroleum contaminated soil remains at depth in a portion of the 
earthen floor crawl space where the second release occurred.  Remedial action reportedly 
included the removal and offsite disposal of petroleum impacted soil and the installation 
of a vapor barrier and gravel layer to mitigate vapor intrusion and direct contact 
exposure.    Subsequent investigation (performed by Wheeler Environmental Services) 
did not identify groundwater contamination at concentrations in exceedance of  Vermont 
Groundwater Enforcement Standards (VGES) in monitoring wells located outside the 
building near the spill area, nor was an immediate risk to sensitive receptors identified. 
Opinion:  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that these known releases of 
petroleum products constitutes a REC.  However, based on the available information it 
does not appear likely that substantial petroleum contamination has migrated from the 
area in the school’s basement that was reportedly most impacted by the release. 
 
This 2017 preliminary soil assessment for off-site disposal planning purposes identified 
PAHs at concentrations above the former and current Vermont Department of Health 
(VDH) residential screening level (0.01 mg/kg and 0.07 mg/g, respectively); arsenic at 
concentrations above the former industrial screening level (3.0 mg/kg), but below the 
Vermont background value (16 mg/kg); and lead at concentrations below the former and 
current residential screening level (400 mg/kg).  While the PAH concentrations 
encountered are below the Vermont urban background concentration (0.58 mg/kg) and 
the arsenic concentrations are below the State-wide background value, the disposal precharacterization
sampling was performed using a composite sample protocol (preferred 
by the receiving facility), so the extent of impact could not be determined.  Importation of 
fill is a potential source of this contamination as well as previous fires which may have 
occurred. 
Opinion:  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that the confirmed presence of 
PAHs, arsenic, and lead from the limited soil assessment constitutes a REC.  If additional 
information regarding the presence of PAHs, arsenic, and lead at the Site is desired, 
further soil sample collection may be warranted.  
 
Floor drains with discharge points that have not been confirmed (although reportedly are 
connected to the municipal sewer) are located in the boiler room.  These drains may have 
accepted fuel oil during the April 2009 spill which occurred in the basement or from 
incidental spills when servicing the boilers, etc. 
Opinion:  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that if these drains are not 
connected to the municipal sewer the presence of these floor drains in the boiler room 
may have exacerbated the 2009 fuel oil releases.  Should additional information be 
desired, the connection to the municipal sewer should be confirmed and analytical 
sample collection from the drains or surrounding subsurface may be warranted. 
 
A variety of “household” hazardous chemicals (paints, cleaners, etc) were identified at 
the Site.  Good housekeeping practices were noted in connection with these chemicals. 
Opinion:  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that there is only a slight chance 
of contamination associated with the presence of containerized hazardous chemicals at 
the Site.  However, if additional information regarding these chemicals is desired then a 
hazardous waste inventory may be warranted.  
7.2 NON-AAI/ASTM SCOPE CONSIDERATIONS 
 The following items are not formal RECs either because there is not sufficient 
information to reasonably suspect that a release of contamination has occurred or because they 
are beyond the scope ASTM 1527-13.  However, it is the Environmental Professional’s opinion 
that these items should be considered when making decisions regarding the redevelopment of the 
Site. 
The presence of asbestos-containing building materials, lead-based paint, and/or PCBcontaining
building materials is beyond the scope of ASTM 1527-13.  However, the 
presence of these materials has been confirmed in the School building.  School facilities 
maintenance staff are familiar with the presence of these materials and according to Mr. 
Wood these materials are being actively managed.  
Opinion:  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that, based on the information 
provided by Mr. Thom Wood, the asbestos, lead paint, and PCB building materials are 
being managed in accordance with approved plans.   
 
7.3 ADDITIONAL OFFSITE CONSIDERATIONS 
The EDR report identified two former drycleaning facilities near the Site.  Neither of 
these former drycleaning facilities are listed hazardous waste Sites and no record of an 
investigation associated with either was identified.   
Opinion:  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that if a release(s) of 
drycleaning solvent occurred at either of these properties the potential exists (although 
very slight) that impacted groundwater and/or vapor could possibly migrate onto the 
Site.  However, there is no evidence to date that a release has occurred.   
8.0 DATA GAPS/LIMITATIONS 
8.1 DATA GAPS 
Heavy vegetation on the steep bank along the southwest side of the Site prevented close 
inspection of the soil surface.  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that this data gap is 
not significant and does not affect the conclusions of this report. 
 
Inspection of the small room which accepted fuel oil during the April 2009 spill was 
hampered by the door, which was partially rusted shut.  Based on the items stored in the room 
and the lack of odors in this room, it is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that this data 
gap is not significant and does not affect the conclusions of this report. 
8.2 LIMITATIONS 
The conclusions of this ESA were based upon information obtained and made available 
to JCO from the following sources: The City of Montpelier; Montpelier School District staff; 
EDR; the VTDEC; the Federal EPA; and from information gathered during the Site 
reconnaissance and interviews.  This information has been intended for the sole use of the 
Montpelier School District and the Central Vermont Regional Planning Commission.  No other 
uses, expressed or implied, are warranted.  The design of the investigation was based on sound 
scientific techniques and experience with similar investigations.  Should additional information 
become available pertaining to environmental concerns that may be associated with the Site, the 
information should be made available to JCO so that we may re-evaluate our conclusions. 
