
The Johnson Company is pleased to present the Central Vermont Regional Planning Commission 
(CVRPC) with this Phase I Environmental Site Assessment (ESA) of the Bonacorsi Property 
located at 16 Prospect Street in Barre, Vermont (the Site).  The Site is comprised of an 
approximately 0.45-acre parcel with an onsite building that is currently used as dry storage for 
wholesale goods by Capitol Candy.  This ESA was conducted in accordance with the scope and 
limitations of the American Society for Testing and Materials' (ASTM) Standard Practice for 
Environmental Site Assessments E 1527-13 and in conformance with 40 CFR Part 312, 
Standards and Practices for All Appropriate Inquiries. 
 
 
 
We declare that, to the best of our professional knowledge and belief, we meet the definition of 
Environmental Professional as defined in §312.10 of 40 CFR Part 312.    
 
We have the specific qualifications based on education, training, and experience to assess a 
property of the nature, history, and setting of the subject property.  We have developed and 
performed the all appropriate inquiries in conformance with the standards and practices set forth 
in 40 CFR Part 312.   
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
The Johnson Company Inc. (JCO) of Montpelier, Vermont was retained by the Central Vermont 
Regional Planning Commission to conduct a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment (ESA) of 
the Bonacorsi Property located at 16 Prospect Street in Barre, Vermont (the Site).  JCO 
understands that the purpose of this Phase I ESA is to provide environmental due diligence in 
support a potential property transaction.  
 
The Site consists of an approximately 0.45-acre parcel with an onsite building that is comprised 
of an amalgamation of multiple interconnected sub-buildings.  The age of the sub-buildings 
range from the mid 1900’s through the early 2000’s.  The building is currently used for dry 
storage of wholesale goods by Capitol Candy.  With the exception of a narrow grassy strip 
between the building and the railroad tracks to the west, the entire Site is either covered with 
asphalt parking areas or is beneath the footprint of the building.  The nearest body of surface 
water is the Stevens Branch of the Winooski River, which is located approximately 100-feet to 
the west. 
 
A dry-cleaning facility was formerly located at the Site and began operations sometime between 
1925 and 1948, and was still in operation as of 1973.  The building that was used for dry 
cleaning was torn down in approximately 1984 and was formerly located in the northern portion 
of the Site where the garage/loading dock and parking lot are currently situated.   Additionally, 
according to a Heindel & Noyes investigation report from 2003, the Site has a “long history” of 
automobile-related activities, including a storage garage and a filling station that was operational 
from the 1930s to the 1960s.  However, it should be noted that based on JCO’s review of 
Sanborn maps and City Directories, no reference of a “filling station” was identified.   
 
Since 2002, a substantial amount of environmental investigation has been conducted at the Site 
in response to chlorinated volatile organic compound (cVOC) contamination.  Reportedly, 
chlorinated solvent containing waste may have been released to the ground surface or released 
from leaking dry cleaning equipment and may also have been poured down drains and entered 
the municipal sewer system.  Based on investigation reports prepared by Heindel & Noyes, two 
different cVOC groundwater plumes have been identified, one which originated from on-site 
releases of chlorinated solvents that likely occurred within or near the footprint of the former 
drycleaner and a second which was determined to have been caused by leaks in the sewer line 
beneath Prospect Street to the north of the Site.  The cVOC plume beneath the Site and a smaller 
lobe of this plume which extends west towards the Stevens Branch of the Winooski River 
reportedly originated from the on-site releases.  Most of the off-site portion of the cVOC 
contamination extends to the north of the Site, following the former Stevens Branch river bed, 
which was backfilled when the river was re-located into a new channel in the early 1900’s.  This 
northern lobe of contamination consists of co-mingled plumes from the onsite release(s) near the 
former dry cleaner and offsite sewer release points.  The investigations also identified petroleum 
contamination in groundwater which appeared to originate from a former on-site underground 
storage tank and/or from off-site source(s); unfortunately the available reports could not confirm 
the source of petroleum.   
 
To address the onsite contamination related to the cVOC groundwater plume, an active 
remediation system consisting of air sparging and vapor extraction was installed that targeted the 
contamination present beneath the footprint of the former dry cleaner.  This system was later 
expanded to include portions of the cVOC plume that had migrated off-site to the north.  After 
the air sparging/vapor extraction system reportedly addressed the easily accessible contamination 
and was no longer effective, permanganate (to promote chemical oxidation) was injected both 
on- and off-site in hopes of further reducing the cVOC concentrations in groundwater.  Based on 
the most recent Heindel & Noyes reports, this remediation has successfully halted off-site 
migration and the on-site and off-site cVOC concentrations in groundwater are stable or 
declining.  However, groundwater cVOC concentrations remain in excess of Vermont 
Groundwater Enforcement Standards (VGES).  This work also had the effect of reducing the 
petroleum constituents in groundwater to concentrations below VGES. 
 
Concurrent with investigation efforts to delineate the extent of the groundwater plume, efforts 
were undertaken to determine the extent of the soil vapor plume.  In addition to delineation, the 
soil vapor investigation work included assessment of the potential for vapor intrusion at the Site 
and four neighboring properties, the Post Office, the City Hall, Gusto’s Bar, and Clark’s Feed 
Store.  Based on the available data regarding cVOC concentrations in soil vapor and indoor air, it 
was determined by Vermont Department of Environmental Conservation (VTDEC) that 
installation of vapor intrusion mitigation systems at the Post Office (located east of the Site) and 
the City Hall (located northeast of the Site) was warranted.  These systems were installed and 
have been operating since 2013.  According to the Heindel & Noyes reports these systems are 
adequately reducing the potential for vapor intrusion at these two locations.  The VTDEC did not 
request installation of vapor intrusion mitigation systems at Gusto’s Bar or at Clark’s Feed Store, 
both of which are located west of the Site. 
 
This ESA was performed by personnel from JCO who meet the definition of Environmental 
Professional as defined in 40 CFR Part 312.  This ESA included reviewing existing 
documentation, available aerial photographs and topographic maps, determining the regulatory 
status of the Site, contacting personnel regarding past and present uses of the Site, investigating 
the potential for past releases of petroleum products and/or hazardous substances at the Site, and 
conducting a site reconnaissance to visually inspect accessible portions of the Site to ascertain 
the presence of recognized environmental conditions (RECs) in the form of present or potential 
release(s) of hazardous substances or petroleum products. In addition, these sources were 
investigated for the presence of historic recognized environmental conditions (HRECs) – a past 
release of hazardous substance(s) that has been addressed to residential use standards or 
unrestricted use criteria – and controlled recognized environmental conditions (CREC) – a past 
release of hazardous substance(s) that has been addressed to non-residential use standards and is 
subject to some type of control – at the Site.  As such, a HREC is not a REC when the remaining 
JCO has performed this Phase I ESA in conformance with the scope and limitations of ASTM 
Practice E-1527-13 of the Bonacorsi Property located at 16 Prospect Street in Barre, Vermont.  
Any exception to, or deletions from, this practice are described in Section 8.1 of this report.  This 
assessment has revealed no evidence of RECs, HRECs, or CRECs in connection with the 
property except for the following:  
 
RECS 
Based on review of the available data, JCO has identified the following RECs at the Site: 
 
• Chlorinated VOC Impacts to Groundwater: Previous analytical data for the Site 
suggests the presence of cVOCs in groundwater that remain at concentrations in excess 
of VGES, both onsite and north of the property.  Based on review of the investigation 
reports provided by the VTDEC, the active remediation conducted in connection with 
cVOC concentrations in groundwater has resulted in concentrations that appear to be 
stable or declining.  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that the confirmed 
presence of cVOCs in groundwater at concentrations above regulatory standards 
constitutes a REC.  However, the groundwater at the Site and at nearby properties is not 
used as a potable source of water, off-site migration has reportedly been halted, and no 
sensitive receptors appear to be at imminent risk.  The VTDEC has requested continued 
biennial groundwater sampling to assess the cVOC concentrations in groundwater both 
on- and off-site. 
 
• Chlorinated VOC Impacts to Soil Vapor: Soil vapor sampling conducted at the Site in 
2002 and 2011 identified the presence of cVOCs both beneath the basement slab and in 
indoor air at concentrations above vapor intrusion screening levels. However, it is 
unknown if the cVOC soil vapor concentrations have decreased beneath the on-site 
building since the 2011 sampling event and if the potential for vapor intrusion remains.  
cVOCs from the Site have also resulted in soil vapor contamination above risk-based 
screening levels in the City Hall and Post Office buildings.  Reportedly, the 
depressurization systems installed beneath these buildings are effectively mitigating the 
cVOCs exposure risk to indoor air, but long-term operation, monitoring, and maintenance 
of these systems is required.  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that the 
confirmed presence of cVOCs in soil vapor at the Site constitutes a REC.  If additional 
information regarding the potential risk of vapor intrusion is desired, sub-slab soil vapor 
sampling and/or indoor air sampling may be warranted. 
 
• Chlorinated VOC Impacts to Soil: While the extent of cVOCs in groundwater and soil 
vapor is well-defined at the Site, the assessments of soil conditions have been limited to 
PID screening. While PIDs are a useful tool to identify the presence of gross 
contamination, the data resulting from PID screening are variable and are not compoundspecific.
 It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that cVOCs may be present in 
soil at concentrations above applicable soil screening levels. If additional information 
regarding the potential for cVOC contamination in soil is desired, collection of soil 
samples for laboratory analysis may be warranted.  This information will be especially 
useful should any future redevelopment of the property include excavation and the 
generation of excess soil that may require offsite management or disposal. 
 
• Petroleum Impacts to Soil: While the petroleum contamination in groundwater has 
reportedly been addressed based on the most recent groundwater monitoring reports, little 
information is available about concentrations in soil.  To date, the assessments of soil 
conditions at the Site have consisted of screening with a photoionization detector (PID), 
rather than laboratory analysis of samples.  It is possible that petroleum constituents in 
soil remain at concentrations above applicable soil screening levels.  It is the 
Environmental Professional’s opinion that this constitutes a REC.  If additional 
information regarding the potential for petroleum contamination in soil is desired, 
collection of soil samples for laboratory analysis may be warranted. 
 
• Potential Leak from Hydraulic Lift: A hydraulic lift was identified inside the building 
and is used to carry materials between the basement and ground floor levels. Based on 
visual inspection of the lift and on historical reports which state that the lift has a history 
of leaking, it appears likely that the lift leaks hydraulic fluid.  It is the Environmental 
Professional’s opinion that if cracks are present in the floor beneath the lift, oil leaking 
from the lift may have impacted the sub-surface.  In addition, based on the apparent age 
of the lift there is a possibility that at one time the lift utilized PCB-containing hydraulic 
fluid and that this fluid could have potentially resulted in PCB-contamination of the 
concrete floor and/or sub slab beneath the lift.  
 
• Drum with Unknown Contents: An unlabeled 55-gallon drum of unknown contents is 
located in the parking lot adjacent to the dumpster.  During the Site walkover, the drum 
was estimated to be less than ¼ full of a solid material.  The drum is exposed to the 
elements and appears to be starting to rust.  The drum is also at risk of being damaged by 
delivery trucks that utilize this area.  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that 
there is a moderate threat of release of whatever materials are contained within the drum.  
 
CRECS  
Based on review of the available data, JCO has not identified any CRECs at the Site. 
 
HRECS  
Based on review of the available data, JCO has not identified any HRECs at the Site. 

ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS 
The following items are not considered formal RECs; however, these items should be 
considered prior to any future construction and renovation activities: 
• Hazardous Building Materials: The potential presence of asbestos-containing building 
materials, lead-based paint, and/or PCB-containing building materials is beyond the 
scope of ASTM 1527-13.  However, given the age and construction of the buildings, 
these materials may be present in buildings on the Site.  In particular, floor tiles and 
hardboard located in the basement are suspected of being asbestos-containing and peeling 
paint was noted on surfaces throughout the older portions of the building.  The membrane 
roof may be PCB and/or asbestos containing.  An asbestos, lead paint, and PCB-building 
materials inspection by a licensed professional may be warranted if additional 
information is desired about the potential presence of these materials.  This information 
would be of particular importance should any renovation or reconstruction of the building 
require disturbance and or disposal of these potential hazardous material containing 
building materials. 
 
• Location in Industrial Area: The Site is located in downtown Barre in a historically 
industrialized area, adjacent to active railroad tracks.  Historically, a railroad spur was 
present at the Site as late as 1964.  The atmospheric deposition of industrial exhaust 
products may have resulted in surficial and/or deeper soil impacts at the Site.  If 
additional information regarding soil quality is desired, then collection of analytical 
samples may be warranted.  
 
• Trench Drains: Trench drains were observed in the loading dock area of the building, 
which was built following demolition of the former drycleaner.  Although, these drains 
were reportedly not associated with the former dry cleaner, they may have accepted 
potentially hazardous material from drips, spills, or leaks which may have occurred in the 
loading dock.  According to the property owner, these drains discharge to the City Sewer 
located to the north of the building.  It is possible that potentially impacted material from 
the trench drains has migrated to the sub-surface through cracks in the piping or through 
loose connections.  Therefore, it is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that there is 
a moderate chance that contamination may be associated with these drains and the 
associated piping.  If additional information regarding the drain contents and discharge 
location is desired, collection of sediment samples for analysis and/or efforts to determine 
condition of the drain piping may be warranted. 
 
• Petroleum Impacted Groundwater: During an investigation conducted at the Site in 
2002, petroleum constituents were identified in groundwater at concentrations in excess 
of VGES.  After a series of remedial actions were implemented at the Site, the petroleum 
concentrations in groundwater decreased, and as of 2008 the concentrations were 
reportedly below VGES.  Considering the data presented in the Heindel & Noyes 
Quarterly Reports suggest that the concentrations of petroleum constituents have 
decreased to below VGES in the areas which were sampled by Heindel & Noyes, it is the 
Environmental Professional’s opinion that this does not rise to the level of a REC.  
However, there is a slight chance that petroleum contamination in groundwater may exist 
in other portions of the Site (from the up-gradient Barre Shell site for example).  If 
additional information regarding petroleum constituent concentrations in groundwater is 
desired, collection of analytical groundwater samples may be warranted. 
 
• Monitoring Wells in Poor Condition: At least two monitoring wells at the Site were 
observed to be in extremely poor condition, with missing road box covers and no visible 
well plugs.  Because these wells are potential vertical migration pathways, it is possible 
that the wells are acting as a conduit for contaminated surficial material to impact the 
subsurface.  While it is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that this condition does 
not rise to the level of a REC, repair/rehabilitation/protection of damaged wells and/or 
appropriate decommissioning of the destroyed or unnecessary wells may be warranted. 
 

1.0  INTRODUCTION 
The Johnson Company, Inc. (JCO), of Montpelier, Vermont was retained by the Central 
Vermont Regional Planning Commission (CVRPC) to conduct a Phase I Environmental Site 
Assessment (ESA) of the Bonacorsi Property located at 16 Prospect Street in Barre, Vermont 
(the Site).  The location of the Site is depicted in Figure 1.  
 
The purpose of this ESA was to identify Recognized Environmental Conditions (RECs) 
associated with the Site that may suggest the presence or likely presence of hazardous substances 
or petroleum products resulting from conditions associated with an existing release, past release, 
or a material threat of a release at the property.  JCO understands that that this Phase I ESA is 
intended to support a possible property transaction. 
   
This ESA included reviewing existing information made available and/or that was 
reasonably ascertainable regarding current and past usage of the property, determining the Site’s 
regulatory status, contacting appropriate personnel regarding current and past uses of the Site, 
investigating past, present and/or the potential for releases of hazardous substances at the Site, 
and conducting a reconnaissance to visually inspect the accessible portions of the Site.   
 
This ESA was performed by personnel from JCO who meet the definition of 
Environmental Professional as defined in 40 CFR Part 312, in conformance within the scope and 
limitations of ASTM E 1527-13 and in compliance with 40 CFR Part 312, Standards and 
Practices for All Appropriate Inquiries.   
 
Credentials of JCO personnel involved with the preparation of this ESA are included as 
Appendix 1. 
2.0  SITE DESCRIPTION 
The Site is located on the south side of the intersection of Merchants Row and Prospect 
Street and is owned by the N&M Investments, LLC.  The Site consists of an approximately 0.45acre
parcel with an onsite building that is comprised of an amalgamation of multiple 
interconnected sub-buildings.  The age of the buildings range from the mid 1900’s through the 
early 2000’s.  The building is currently used as dry storage for wholesale goods by Capitol 
Candy.  Figure 2 shows the location of the Site relative to its surroundings.   
2.1 SETTING AND SURROUNDING DEVELOPMENT 
The host vicinity consists of residential properties (primarily to the west and south) and 
commercial/municipal properties including restaurants, the City Hall, the Barre Post Office, a 
gas station, a bank, and a dental surgery office.  The Site is abutted to the north by Prospect 
Street, to the west by the M&B railroad, to the east by the Barre Post Office, and to the south by 
the Barre Evangelical Free Church.  The northwest corner of the Barre Shell site (SMS #: 
951841, currently a Champlain Farms filling station) abuts the southeast corner of the Site.  
Topographically, the ground surface is relatively flat and is covered with asphalt parking areas or 
is within the footprint of the building, except for a narrow grassy strip between the building and 
the railroad tracks.  The Site and surrounding properties are depicted on Figure 2. 
2.2 HEATING, WATER AND SEWER 
The Site is currently served by Barre sewer and water utilities.  The building is heated 
with forced hot air from oil furnaces located in the basement.  The fuel for these furnaces is 
provided from two 275-gallon above ground storage tanks (ASTs), also located in the basement.  
Electricity to the property is provided by Green Mountain Power via overhead lines.  No polemounted
transformers were noted at the Site. 
2.3 GEOLOGY AND HYDROGEOLOGY 
The bedrock in the area is mapped as the Waits River formation, a phyllite metalimestone 
described as “Dark-gray to silvery-gray, lustrous, carbonaceous muscovite-biotite-quartz (+/garnet)
phyllite containing abundant beds of punky-brown-weathering, dark-bluish-gray 
micaceous quartz-rich limestone in beds ranging from 10 cm to 10 m thick” (Ratcliffe, et al, 
2011).  
 
The Site is mapped as Udipsamments which is a well-drained, coarse-grained, poorly 
sorted sand (EDR, 2017).  The Heindel & Noyes Corrective Action Plan (CAP) dated November 
12, 2004 states that the surficial geology at the Site is “recent alluvium from the nearby Stevens 
Branch and miscellaneous fill material”.  Heindel & Noyes indicated that angular stone 
fragments indicative of glacial till were encountered “in the center of the property” and 
concluded that this till serves as an impeding layer for the Site.  The Heindel & Noyes CAP does 
not indicate an approximate depth to till, nor is depth to till readily apparent from the boring logs 
provided in the 2004 CAP. 
 
The direction of groundwater flow was not directly measured as part of this ESA.  
However, prior groundwater investigations have been conducted in connection with the 
chlorinated solvent contamination at the Site.  The results of these investigations found that the 
depth to groundwater at the Site was reported to be approximately 12 feet below ground surface.   
The investigations also found that the hydraulic gradient across the Site is generally to the 
northwest.    However, in the early 1900s, the Stevens Branch of the Winooski River adjacent to 
the Site was diverted into a manmade channel and the original river bed was backfilled.  The 
nature of the backfill used created preferential pathway to the north along the former river 
corridor. 
 
2.4 THREATENED SPECIES AND WETLANDS 
Vermont Agency of Natural Resources (VTANR) Natural Resources Atlas (NRA) does 
not show any wetlands within approximately 0.25-miles of the Site.  The VTANR NRA shows 
two Class 2 wetlands located between approximately 0.75-mile and 1-mile of the Site (VTDEC1, 
2016).  These wetlands are located at substantially higher elevations relative to the Site. 
The VTANR NRA does not list any rare, threatened, or endangered species within 1 mile 
of the Site (VTDEC1, 2016). 
3.0  SITE HISTORY AND REVIEW OF EXISTING INFORMATION 
3.1 HISTORICAL REVIEW 
3.1.1 Land Records 
A search of the Land Records in the Barre City Clerk’s office was conducted on the day 
of the Site walkover, May 8, 2017.  It should be noted that JCO staff are not title search 
professionals; a formal land records review should be conducted by a qualified title search 
attorney.  Details of historical ownership of the Site are summarized in Table 1.   
3.1.2 U.S.G.S. Topographic Maps 
The 1922, 1924, 1947, 1948, 1951, 1957, 1978, 1981, 1988, and 2012 United States 
Geological Survey (USGS) topographic quadrangle maps for the target area were provided by 
Environmental Data Resources, Inc. (EDR) and reviewed as part of this ESA (EDR, 2016).  Map 
series were 15-minute (1922 through 1957), and 7.5 minute (1978 through 2012).  The maps are 
included as Appendix 2.  The Site and immediate vicinity appear to be approximately the current 
configuration (street locations, the railroad, etc.) in the 1922 through 1978 maps.  The 1988 map 
shows Barre City has an urban area, but only shows significant municipal buildings (the post 
office, city hall, schools, auditoriums, etc.).  The 2012 map shows streets and elevation contours 
only – no structures are shown anywhere on this map. 
3.1.3 Aerial Photographs 
Aerial photographs from 1939, 1942, 1973, 1976, 1980, 1986, 1992, 1996, 2006, 2008, 
2009, 2011, and 2012 were provided by EDR and reviewed as part of this ESA. The aerial 
photos are included as Appendix 2. The 1939 photograph appears to show a structure at the Site, 
but the quality is poor and no details can be clearly deciphered.  The 1942 through1980 
photographs show a structure at the Site which appears to have a different footprint than the 
current building, although portions of the structure may have been incorporated into the current 
structure.  The structure appears to be consistent with the later Sanborn maps.  The 1986 and 
subsequent photographs show the Site approximately in its current configuration. 
3.1.4 Sanborn Fire Insurance Maps 
Historical Sanborn Fire Insurance Maps for 1884, 1889, 1894, 1900, 1905, 1910, 1916, 
1925, 1948, 1960, and 1964 were provided by EDR. The maps are included in Appendix 2.  The 
1884 map shows two dwellings at the Site.  A blacksmith/wagon shop is shown on the abutting 
property to the west.  The other abutting properties appear to be residential with the exception of 
a dentist on the opposite side of Prospect Street (then called Bridge Street) from the Site and a 
cobbler where City Hall are currently located.  The railroad tracks are not shown on the 1884 
map. The 1889 through 1900 maps show the Site and abutting properties in approximately this 
configuration with a livery at the south end of the Site appearing in the 1894 map and a portion 
of the eastern dwelling being shown as a wagon shop in the 1900 map.  The railroad tracks, a 
railroad spur onto the Site, and the City Hall first appear in the 1889 map and are present in all 
subsequent maps.  The western dwelling at the Site is not shown in the 1905 or 1910 maps and a 
grist mill appears to the south of the Site in the 1905 map.  In the 1916 map, the remaining 
(eastern) dwelling has been converted to auto storage.  The 1925 shows the Site being used as 
general storage and as “whol. gro.” (perhaps wholesale grocers, but not certain).  The 1948 
through 1964 maps show a drycleaner adjacent to Prospect Street at the north end of the Site, a 
“bottling beverages” structure at the south end of the Site, and the same “whol.gro.” structure 
(although this structure is labeled “Recreation Center” in the 1964 map).  The blacksmith shop 
on the abutting parcel to the west is shown on these maps as an auto repair shop and an auto sales 
and service business appears to be operating on the property to the south. 
 
3.1.5 City Directories 
The Cole Information Services and Mannings Street Directories for the Site were 
provided by EDR (see Appendix 2).  The 1961 Mannings Street Directory lists Malnati Dry 
Cleaners and the Lighthouse Teen Center at the Site.  The Barre Auto Supply Co is listed on the 
abutting property to the west.  The 1967 and 1973 Mannings Street Directories list Malnati Dry 
Cleaners and a wholesale grocer at the Site.  The Barre Auto Supply Co is listed in the 1967 but 
not the 1973 directory.  The 1992 Cole Information Services directory lists “Bonacorsi & Sons 
Inc. Groc” at the Site.  The site is not listed in the 1999 through 2013 Cole Information Services 
directory.   
3.1.6 Environmental Questionnaire 
JCO’s standard Environmental Questionnaire was provided to Mr. Dominic Bonacorsi 
and was received by JCO on March 20, 2017.  A copy of the completed questionnaire is included 
in Appendix 3. 
3.2 INTERVIEWS 
3.2.1 Current Owner 
Mr. Dominic Bonacorsi was interviewed by Mr. Jeremy Matt of JCO on March 20, 2017.  
Mr. Bonacorsi indicated that, other than the conditions documented in the numerous 
investigations conducted at the Site, he was not aware of any spills, releases of hazardous 
materials, or other issues of environmental concern at the Site. 
3.2.2 Past Owner/Occupant 
The Site has been owned by the Bonacorsi family since approximately 1977, and the 
previous owner (Mr. John Santini) is deceased.   
3.2.3 State/Local Officials 
Deputy Fire Chief Joseph Aldsworth of the Barre Fire Department was interviewed by 
telephone by Mr. Jeremy Matt of JCO on May 16, 2017.  Deputy Chief Aldsworth indicated that 
he was aware that the Site was a hazardous waste site, and that a number of investigations had 
been conducted in connection with the Site.  He also stated that approximately 18-months ago 
the fire department responded to a complaint of leaking refrigerant at the Site but that the 
incident was not an on-going risk.  Deputy Chief Aldsworth was not aware of any other incidents 
at the Site involving hazardous chemicals or threats to human health at the Site (Aldsworth, 
2017). 
3.2.4 Neighboring or Nearby Property Owner/Occupant    
On May 10, 2017, Mr. Steve Micheli, interim Director of Public Works, was interviewed 
by email by Mr. Jeremy Matt of JCO.  Mr. Micheli identified that (with the exception of the 
information provided in the investigation and spill reports provided to the VTDEC), he was not 
aware of any complaints of spills, dumping, or complaints regarding human health at the Site; 
fires; or other incidents involving hazardous chemicals or the environment (Micheli, 2017). 
 
Calls were made to Gusto’s Bar on April 5th, April 13th, and May 10th, 2017.  The phone 
rang without being picked up or going to voicemail on each occasion. 
3.3 PRIOR INVESTIGATIONS 
 A substantial degree of investigation has been conducted at the Site to date in response to 
cVOC contamination (i.e. tetrachloroethylene (PCE), trichloroethylene (TCE), and degradation 
products), from a former on-site drycleaner.  The Sanborn Maps show that a dry-cleaning 
operation started at the Site between 1925 and 1948, and according to the Manning Directory 
that the facility was still operational as of 1973.  Reportedly, chlorinated solvent containing 
waste was discharged directly to the ground surface and was also disposed of in onsite sanitary 
drains that are reportedly connected to the municipal sewer system.  Petroleum contamination 
was also encountered, presumably from a former on-site underground storage tank and/or from 
off-site source(s).  A Heindel & Noyes investigation report from 2002 references a UST closure 
of a 1,000-gallon fuel oil UST, but concluded that this tank was unlikely to be the source of the 
on-site petroleum contamination.  However, a formal UST closure report was not included in the 
VTDEC records.  Heindel & Noyes reports also reference closure of a former filling station 
during which USTs were reportedly emptied to the Site surface.  However, JCO was not able to 
find any historical documentation of this purported filling station.  Additional details are 
provided in Section 4.3.2.  Both the petroleum and cVOC contamination was originally 
discovered in 2002.   
As part of this Phase I ESA, JCO contacted the VTDEC and requested all records related 
to the Site.  The VTDEC provided a total of 192 files (reports, work plans, letter and email 
correspondence, meeting notes, etc.) which were subsequently reviewed by JCO for the purpose 
of understanding the overall history of prior investigations.  Documents which contained 
substantial information relevant to an understanding of investigation and remediation at the Site 
or to current Site conditions were very briefly summarized; these summaries are included in 
Table 2.  A total of 44 investigation reports, 5 remedial action documents (corrective action 
plans, as-built documents, etc.), and 8 notes, memoranda, or letters were summarized.  The main 
points of this review are as follows: 
• cVOC contamination is present in groundwater and soil vapor beneath the Site and has 
migrated to the north along the Merchant’s Row portion of Barre City and to a lesser 
extent to the west towards the Stevens Branch of the Winooski River.  Soil vapor has also 
migrated to the east towards the Post Office building.  The cVOC migration in 
groundwater to the north appears to be following the former Stevens Branch river bed 
which was reportedly backfilled when the river was relocated into a new channel in the 
early 1900s.  It should be noted that another cVOC impacted groundwater plume exists 
under Prospect Street (located immediately north of the Site), which reportedly was the 
result of a leak(s) in an underground sewer line.  
• Active remediation (air sparging, vapor extraction, and injection of oxygen-releasing 
compounds) has been conducted. 
• cVOC groundwater concentrations remain above VGES, but show decreasing 
concentrations between the two more recent groundwater sampling events (in 2013 and 
2016)  
• Petroleum groundwater concentrations at the Site have decreased to below VGES 
• Sub-slab depressurization systems were installed and are currently active at the City Hall 
and Post Office buildings, and continued operation of these systems is required to 
minimize the potential for chlorinated vapor intrusion.   
• The VTDEC determined that installation of vapor intrusion mitigation systems at Gusto’s 
Bar or at the Clark’s Feed Store building, located to the west of the Site was not 
warranted. 
• The VTDEC has requested biennial groundwater monitoring, with the results of the next 
sample event to be presented by December 31, 2017. 
• The VTDEC has requested annual measurement of the pressures developed by the subslab
depressurization systems, with results to be presented by December 31, 2016.  A 
report of this inspection was not included in the VTDEC files. 
4.0  REGULATORY STATUS 
4.1 ENVIRONMENTAL LIENS 
 
A search of the files at the Barre City Clerk’s office on May 8, 2017 revealed no 
environmental liens on the property.  However, it is noted that JCO Environmental Professionals 
are not title attorneys. 
4.2 FEDERAL REGULATORY FILES 
 A database radius search report was provided by EDR and information for the following 
sub-sections was taken from the EDR report.  If the EDR results suggest that a more detailed 
assessment of a particular property or regulatory category is warranted, then the reason and 
additional search results are detailed below.  Otherwise, all information provided in this section 
was obtained from the EDR Radius Map Report. The EDR Radius Map Report is included as 
Appendix 2. 
4.2.1 Federal National Priority List (NPL) 
The Site is not listed on the National Priority List (NPL), i.e., Superfund site, nor is any 
property within a one-mile search radius of the Site. 
4.2.1.1 Delisted NPL sites  
 
 Neither the Site nor any other properties within the one-mile search radius are 
delisted NPL sites. 
4.2.2 Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Information 
System (CERCLIS) List 
The Site does not appear on the CERCLIS database and no other listed CERCLIS sites 
within a 0.5-mile search radius of the Site. 
4.2.2.1 No Further Remedial Action Planned (NFRAP) site list 
The Site is not a CERCLIS designated site with a no further remedial action 
planned (NFRAP) status.  Two CERCLIS NFRAP sites, Howe Cleaners (EPA ID: 
VTD052021656) and Barre Coal Tar (EPA ID: VTN000103777) are located between 1/8 
and ¼ mile of the nearest Site boundary.   
4.2.3 Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Generators 
No RCRA generators are listed at the Site.  Two RCRA conditionally-exempt small 
quantity generators (CESQGs) are listed within 1/8-mile of the nearest Site boundary.  The offsite
generators within 1/8-mile are Wesco, Inc. and 2 Park Street.  Eight additional CESQGs are 
located between 1/8 and ¼ mile of the Site. 
4.2.3.1 RCRA Corrective Action Sites (CORRACTS) List 
The Site is not on the list of RCRA Corrective Action sites for EPA Region 1.  
One site (Safety-Kleen Systems, Inc.) is located approximately 0.9-miles from the Site.  
No other CORRACTS properties were identified within a one-mile search radius of the 
Site. 
4.2.4 RCRA Treatment, Storage and Disposal (TSD) Facilities 
There are no transportation and disposal (TSD) facilities listed within a 0.5-mile search 
radius of the Site. 
4.2.5 Federal Institutional Control/Engineering Registries 
There are no federally-registered controls within a 0.5-mile search radius of the Site. 
4.2.6 Federal Emergency Response Notification (ERNS) List 
 
The EDR radius report did not identify any federal records of a spill at the Site. However, 
a spill of 3-gallons of potassium permanganate (an oxidizer) was reported to the State of 
Vermont.  See Section 4.3.3 for additional details. 
4.2.7 EPA On-Scene Coordinator Emergency Environmental Response 
The EPA On-scene Coordinator (EPA OSC) program performs rapid responses to remove 
direct contact risks by trespassers or the public.  The EPA OSC records are not part of the 
standard EDR database search, therefore JCO conducted a separate search of OSC records.  As 
of March 16, 2017, no OSC Sites are located within a 1.0-mile search radius of the Site 
(EPAOSC, 2017). 
4.3 STATE/TRIBAL REGULATORY FILES 
 There are no recognized tribal or American Indian-owned lands within Vermont; 
therefore, no tribal files were searched during this ESA. 
4.3.1 Hazardous Sites List 
The Site is listed by the VTDEC Sites Management Section (SMS) as an active, medium 
priority, hazardous waste Site with SMS number 2002-3048.  Additional details are provided 
below.  Based on JCO’s review of the EDR Radius Map Report and on a search of the VTANR 
NRA, a total of 77 hazardous waste Sites are located within the 1-mile search radius of the Site.  
Of these Sites, 47 are inactive, 13 are active low priority, 14 are active medium priority, and 3 
are active high priority (VTDEC1, 2016).  The hazardous waste site information available from 
the NRA is summarized in Table 3.  Based on the surrounding topography, contaminant types, 
human activity, etc. four of the hazardous waste sites listed above were identified as sites of 
interest and are discussed in more detail below.  Given the surrounding topography, the 
contaminant profiles identified, and groundwater flow direction at the other 73 hazardous waste 
Sites, and on a review of the Site Status notes, it is considered unlikely that significant 
contamination from these sites has migrated on to the Site.   
 
Bonacorsi Property (SMS #: 2002-3048) – The Site 
The property was listed with the VTDEC as a hazardous waste Site following the discovery of 
chlorinated solvents and petroleum constituents in groundwater above Vermont Groundwater 
Enforcement Standards (VGES) in 2002.  Additional details are provided in Section 3.3 and in 
Table 2. 
 
Howe Cleaners (SMS #: 992631) / Merchants Row/ Enterprise Alley (SMS #: 20114142) 
The Howe Cleaners site is a high priority site as a result of PCE contamination in soil, soil gas, 
and groundwater.  The former Howe Cleaner’s facility is located approximately 1000-feet north 
of the Site.  Based on the investigation reports that were reviewed, the Howe Cleaners site is 
hydro-geologically down-gradient of the Bonacorsi property.  The Merchants Row site was 
defined as part of Barre’s downtown redevelopment plan and encompasses the Bonacorsi Site 
and the Howe Cleaners site.  Howe Cleaners was dry cleaner that operated between 1947 and 
1992.  Prior to 1972, the dry-cleaning operation reportedly utilized the petroleum-based Stoddard 
solvent.  After 1972, the operation was converted to a chlorinated solvent-based process.  These 
solvents reportedly stored in two underground storage tanks (USTs) underneath the building and 
have been described as a source for the identified soil and groundwater contamination at the site.  
Reportedly, chlorinated solvents were discharged onto both the ground surface outside the 
building and to the floor drains within the foundation of the building.  Soil and groundwater 
investigations at the site have identified PCE concentrations in soils at depths ranging from 8 to 
50 feet below ground surface at concentrations exceeding 100,000 parts per billion.  
Approximately 180 tons of impacted soil was removed from the site in 2003 and a soil vapor 
extraction (SVE) system was installed in 2004 and operated until 2008 when it was destroyed in 
a fire.  The SVE system removed an estimated 428-pounds of PCE.  Groundwater sampling 
results at the site from 2004 to 2006 and 2012 indicated that PCE concentrations continue to 
exist at levels exceeding the Vermont Primary Groundwater Quality Standards (PGQS).  Based 
on a review of the groundwater and soil gas contamination isocontours presented in the Nobis 
Engineering Corrective Action Feasibility Investigation (CAFI) dated March 2013, it does not 
appear likely that contamination from the Howe Cleaners property has migrated to the Site 
(Nobis, 2013) 
 
Barre Shell (former Dave’s Mini Mart) (SMS #: 951841) 
The Barre Shell site is an actively listed hazardous waste Site following the findings of a Phase II 
ESA at the site.  Barre Shell abuts the Site to the southeast and is presumably up-gradient of the 
Site.  Soil borings advanced downgradient of the four onsite gasoline USTs identified petroleum 
contamination in the soils.  Between 1997 and 2016, five rounds of groundwater sampling were 
conducted.  The results of these investigations suggest generally declining groundwater 
concentrations.  Based on the location of the contaminant plume at the Barre Shell property 
(potentially up-gradient of and adjacent to the Site), it is possible that contaminated groundwater 
from Barre Shell has migrated onto the Site.  If petroleum impacted groundwater did migrate to 
the Site, impacts from the Barre Shell property would likely be observed in the southern portion 
of the Bonacorsi Site (ECS, 2016).  
 
Washington Apartments (SMS #: 931437) 
The Washington Apartments are listed as a hazardous waste site as a result of #2 fuel oil 
contamination that originated from a leaking onsite UST and are located approximately 400-feet 
northeast of the Site.  The UST was closed and 18 soil borings and 11 monitoring wells were 
installed to better determine the extent of the contamination.  Free-phase product was regularly 
encountered in one monitoring well and benzene was consistently detected at concentrations 
exceeding the VGES in two monitoring wells.  Eight additional monitoring wells were installed 
and nine sub-slab vapor samples were collected at a later date.  Based on the results presented in 
the most recent groundwater monitoring report, it is considered unlikely that contamination from 
Washington Street Apartments, located at 14 Washington Street in Barre, has migrated to the 
Site (VHG, 2016). 
4.3.2 Underground Storage Tank List 
 
There are no registered active underground storage tanks (USTs) at the Site.  The Heindel 
& Noyes Phase I ESA from 2002 references that a 1,000-gallon fuel oil UST was present at the 
Site (the approximate location is shown on Figure 2).  According to the 2002 Heindel & Noyes 
Phase I report, the tank was installed circa 1984-1987.  The Heindel & Noyes Preliminary Site 
Investigation Report dated November 12, 2002 states that this tank was closed by Heindel & 
Noyes, and that the peak PID reading beneath the tank was 15 ppmV, and from this Heindel & 
Noyes concluded that the 1,000-gallon UST was not the source of petroleum contamination 
found in “the earlier investigation”.  
 
The Heindel & Noyes report from November 12, 2002 also states: 
“H&N also received an eyewitness account from a Barre resident that the 
property used to be a filling station.  As report to us, the fuel tanks were apparently 
removed from the ground and their contents spilled on to the ground when the filling 
station was closed”.   
 
The Heindel & Noyes report from April 9, 2003 states: 
 “Historically there is a long history of auto use at the Site, beginning as a storage 
garage through to its use as a gasoline filling station from the 1930s through the 1960s.  
According to a long-time resident, the closure of the filling station involved emptying the 
liquid from the tanks on to the property.  This would explain why the highest petroleum 
concentrations are found in the footprint of the former gasoline pumping station”.   
 
Unfortunately, the 2003 Heindel & Noyes report was not scanned properly and does not 
show the aforementioned filling station.  Based on JCO’s review of the Sanborn maps and the 
street directories, no reference to a filling station was encountered whatsoever.  Therefore, it is 
unclear to JCO exactly where this “filling station” may have been located. 
The Heindel & Noyes report dated April 9, 2003 describes a ground penetrating radar 
survey which was conducted in November 2002.  This work identified two suspect areas.  
However, subsequent excavations conducted in these areas did not identify any USTs. 
4.3.3 Spills List 
Neither the EDR report nor the Natural Resources Atlas identified spills at the Site (EDR, 
2017; VTDEC1, 2017).  However, on May 15, 2006 a spill of approximately 3-gallons of 1% 
potassium permanganate solution (an oxidizer used in the treatment system) occurred.  During 
injection, the solution overflowed from the wells on to the ground.  The release was contained by 
the Heindel & Noyes technician, but while the technician was off-site, rain started to fall which 
mobilized the solution.  The solution, which was described as being “brilliant purple” in color, 
flowed down Prospect Street.  The street was shut down by the Barre fire department until the 
source of the spill was identified. 
4.3.4 Landfills 
There are no certified landfills within a 0.5 mile search radius of the Site  
4.3.5 Institutional Controls/Engineering Controls Registries 
A review of the records available at the Barre City Clerk’s office revealed no institutional 
and/or engineering controls filed in the Land Records for the Site as of May 8, 2017.   
4.3.6 Voluntary Cleanup Sites 
Vermont does not specifically have a voluntary cleanup program, but the Brownfield 
Reuse Environmental Liability Limitation Act (BRELLA, effective July 1, 2008), acts as one for 
non-responsible parties.  See Section 4.3.7 below for additional information regarding nearby 
Brownfield sites. 
4.3.7 Brownfield Sites 
The Site is enrolled in the Brownfield Cleanup Program.  Four Brownfield sites are 
located with on 0.5-mile of the nearest Site boundary.  These sites are the Former Twin Cities 
Custom Sandblast site (SMS #: 2009-3892), the Gable Place site (SMS #: 2010-4038), the Rueda 
Property (SMS #: 2011-4196), and the Blanchard Block site (SMS #: 2012-4324).  It is 
considered unlikely that contamination from these properties has impacted the Site.  Additional 
details regarding these sites are provided in Table 3.   
4.4 LOCAL REGULATORY FILES  
4.4.1 Fire Department/Town Health Officer/Police 
Details regarding interviews with local officials are provided in Section 3.2.3. 
4.4.2 Local Electric Utility Company (Polychlorinated biphenyls) 
 Electricity to the property was served by Green Mountain Power via overhead lines.  No 
pole-mounted transformers were noted at the Site. 
 
 Based on the age and construction of the on-site buildings, it is possible that PCBcontaining
building materials (caulk, paint, sealant, mastic, etc.) were used during the 
construction of the buildings. 
 
4.5 NON-AAI/ASTM SCOPE CONSIDERATIONS 
4.5.1 Asbestos and Lead Paint Issues 
An asbestos and lead based paint inspection was not performed as part of this ESA.  
However, given the age and construction of the buildings it is possible that asbestos containing 
materials and/or lead-based paint are present in the on-site buildings.  In particular, suspect floor 
tiles were observed on the basement floor and suspect hardboard was noted in the room in the 
basement which houses the fuel oil ASTs. 
5.0  SITE RECONNAISSANCE 
A Site walkover was conducted on May 8, 2017 by Jeremy Matt of JCO.  Mr. Matt was 
accompanied by a representative of Capitol Candy (the current Site occupant).  The 
representative was not knowledgeable about the Site history; however, following the walkover 
Mr. Jim Thibeault of Capitol Candy answered questions regarding the Site.  The weather 
conditions on the day of the Site visit were overcast, approximately 40 degrees, with light wind.  
Photographs taken during the Site visit are included as Appendix 4 of this report.   
5.1 EXTERIOR OBSERVATIONS 
The exterior portions of the Site consist of an asphalt parking lot (in poor condition) 
located between the building and Prospect Street to the north, a narrow grassy strip between the 
building and the railroad tracks to the west, and very narrow (1-3 feet wide) alleyways to the 
south and east of the building.  No evidence of spills was observed in the parking area or other 
exterior surfaces, but a number of monitoring wells were noted.  One of these wells appeared to 
have been destroyed; the road box cover was missing; the well casing was open and no well plug 
was visible.  A second road box (with the well cover on the ground nearby) was filled with soil 
and no well casing was visible.  Additional monitoring well road boxes in serviceable condition 
were noted, but were not opened or gauged to confirm viability.  A dumpster, a drum of 
unknown contents (estimated to be less than ¼ full of a solid material), and an approximately 
six-foot square shed containing the treatment system components for the Post Office vapor 
intrusion mitigation system were present in the parking lot.  This shed was locked and the key 
was not available.  No stressed vegetation or other evidence of contamination was noted in the 
grassy strip between the building and the railroad.  A variety of trash (food containers, bottles, 
etc.) was noted in these alleyways, but no items of environmental concern were noted. 
5.2 INTERIOR OBSERVATIONS 
 The interior portions of the Site are used by Capitol Candy as storage space.  The items 
stored by Capitol Candy include packaged food, beverages (e.g. soda, wine, etc.), product 
display stands to be placed in stores, extra steel shelving units, household furniture, coffee 
makers, plastic crates, empty beer kegs, unused Styrofoam food containers, and a large number 
of boxes of unknown contents.   
 
In the loading dock area at the northern end of the building (near Prospect Street), a series 
of drains were noted.  Mr. Bonacorsi was asked about the discharge location of these drains, and 
he indicated that they discharge to the City of Barre sewer system.  It should also be noted that 
these drains are located in the newest portion of the building, which was constructed following 
demolition of the former dry cleaner building.  No drains were noted elsewhere in the building. 
 
Several of the rooms in the building were former cold storage areas from when the 
building was used as a wholesale grocery.  According to label on the refrigerant containers 
observed during the Site walkover, the refrigerant used in this system is Honeywell Genetron 
408A, which is a mixture of chlorodifluoromethane (47%), 1,1,1-trifluoroethane (46%), and 
pentafluoroethane (7%). 
 
Two 275-gallon ASTs were noted in the basement.  These tanks supply fuel to two forced 
hot air furnaces which provide heat for the building.  These tanks appeared to be in good 
condition, with no petroleum odors or visual evidence of substantial leaks. 
 
During the walkover of the basement, floor tiles in poor condition were noted.  Based on 
the apparent age of these tiles, they may be asbestos-containing.  Additional suspect asbestoscontaining
material (ACM) was noted in the form of hardboard paneling on the ceiling of the 
basement room which contains the fuel oil ASTs.  Additional floor tiles were noted at the top of 
the stairs which lead from the second floor down to the ground floor office/kitchen area.  
However, it is noted that JCO Environmental Professionals are not trained asbestos 
professionals. 
 
A hydraulically powered lift was present in the northern portion of the building and is 
used to carry materials between the ground floor and the basement.  A case of automatic 
transmission fluid (quart containers) was noted next to the lift, presumably for refilling the lift’s 
hydraulic reservoir as necessary.  The floor beneath the lift is lowered approximately 4-inches to 
allow the lift floor to be even with the level of the basement floor.  This lowered area contained 
sorbent material which appeared to be mostly saturated with oil.  The 2002 Heindel & Noyes 
Phase I ESA states that this lift has a history of leaking. 
  
 
6.0  USER RESPONSIBILITIES 
In order to qualify for one of the Landowner Liability Protections (LLP) offered by the 
Small Business Liability Relief and Brownfields Revitalization Act of 2001, the user(s) and/or 
grantee(s) or a party on behalf of the user(s) and/or grantee(s) must collect the following 
information, if applicable, and should make the information available to the environmental 
professional upon request: 
 
1. Environmental cleanup liens that are filed or recorded against the Site; 
2. Activity and land use limitations that are in place on the Site or that have been 
filed or recorded in a registry; 
3. Specialized knowledge or experience of the person seeking to qualify for the 
Limited Liability Protections (LLPs); 
4. Relationship of the purchase price to the fair market value of the property if it 
were not contaminated; 
5. Commonly known or reasonably ascertainable information about the property;  
6. The degree of obviousness of the presence or likely presence of contamination at 
the property and the ability to detect the contamination by appropriate 
investigation. 
 
The information listed above was addressed by Clare Rock of the CVRPC. A copy of a 
completed User Questionnaires pertaining to the Site has been included with this report as 
Appendix 5. 
7.0  CONCLUSIONS & OPINIONS 
JCO has performed a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment in conformance with the 
scope and limitations of ASTM Practice E-1527 of the Bonacorsi Property located at 16 Prospect 
Street in Barre, Vermont (the Site).  Any exception to, or deletions from, this practice are 
described in Section 8.1 of this report.   
 
This assessment has revealed no evidence of recognized environmental conditions 
(RECs, CRECs, or HRECs) in connection with the property except for the following (see 
Sections 7.1, 7.2, and 7.3 below). 
7.1 RECOGNIZED ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS 
Based on review of the available data, JCO has identified the following RECs at the Site: 
 
• Chlorinated VOC Impacts to Groundwater: Previous analytical data for the Site 
suggests the presence of cVOCs in groundwater that remain at concentrations in excess 
of VGES, both onsite and north of the property.  Based on review of the investigation 
reports provided by the VTDEC, the active remediation conducted in connection with 
cVOC concentrations in groundwater has resulted in concentrations that appear to be 
stable or declining.  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that the confirmed 
presence of cVOCs in groundwater at concentrations above regulatory standards 
constitutes a REC.  However, the groundwater at the Site and at nearby properties is not 
used as a potable source of drinking water off-site migration has reportedly been halted, 
and no sensitive receptors appear to be at imminent risk. Although an imminent risk does 
not appear to be present, a risk of vapor intrusion does exist and therefore a threat to 
indoor area quality within the Site building should be considered. The VTDEC has 
requested continued biennial groundwater sampling to assess the cVOC concentrations in 
groundwater both on- and off-site. 
 
• Chlorinated VOC Impacts to Soil Vapor: Soil vapor sampling conducted at the Site in 
2002 and 2011 identified the presence of cVOCs both beneath the basement slab and in 
indoor air at concentrations above vapor intrusion screening levels. However, it is 
unknown if the cVOC soil vapor concentrations have decreased beneath the on-site 
building since the 2011 sampling event and if the potential for vapor intrusion remains.  
cVOCs from the Site have also resulted in soil vapor contamination above risk-based 
screening levels in the City Hall and Post Office buildings.  Reportedly, the 
depressurization systems installed beneath these buildings are effectively mitigating the 
cVOCs exposure risk to indoor air, but long-term operation, monitoring, and maintenance 
of these systems is required.  It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that the 
confirmed presence of cVOCs in soil vapor at the Site constitutes a REC.  If additional 
information regarding the potential risk of vapor intrusion is desired, sub-slab soil vapor 
sampling and/or indoor air sampling may be warranted. 
 
• Chlorinated VOC Impacts to Soil: While the extent of cVOCs in groundwater and soil 
vapor is well-defined at the Site, the assessments of soil conditions have been limited to 
PID screening. While PIDs are a useful tool to identify the presence of gross 
contamination, the data resulting from PID screening is variable and is not compoundspecific.
 It is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that cVOCs may be present in 
soil at concentrations above applicable soil screening levels.  If additional information 
regarding the potential for cVOC contamination in soil is desired, collection of soil 
samples for laboratory analysis may be warranted.  This information will be especially 
useful should any future redevelopment of the property include excavation and the 
generation of excess soil that may require offsite management or disposal. 
 
• Petroleum Impacts to Soil: While the petroleum contamination in groundwater has 
reportedly been addressed based on the most recent groundwater monitoring reports, little 
information is available about concentrations in soil.  To date, the assessments of soil 
conditions at the Site have consisted of screening with a PID, rather than laboratory 
analysis of samples.  It is possible that petroleum constituents in soil remain at 
concentrations above applicable soil screening levels.  It is the Environmental 
Professional’s opinion that this constitutes a REC.  If additional information regarding 
the potential for petroleum contamination in soil is desired, collection of soil samples for 
laboratory analysis may be warranted. 
 
• Potential Leak from Hydraulic Lift: A hydraulic lift was identified inside the building 
and is used to carry materials between the basement and ground floor levels. Based on 
visual inspection of the lift and on historical reports which state that the lift has a history 
of leaking, it appears likely that the lift leaks hydraulic fluid.  It is the Environmental 
Professional’s opinion that if cracks are present in the floor beneath the lift, oil leaking 
from the lift may have impacted the sub-surface.  In addition, based on the apparent age 
of the lift there is a possibility that at one time the lift utilized PCB-containing hydraulic 
fluid and that this fluid could have potentially resulted in PCB-contamination of the 
concrete floor and/or sub slab beneath the lift.  
 
• Drum with Unknown Contents: An unlabeled steel 55-gallon drum of unknown 
contents located in the parking lot adjacent to the dumpster.  During the Site walkover, 
the drum was estimated to be less than ¼ full of a solid material.  The drum is exposed to 
the elements and rust was observed on its surface.  The drum is also at risk of being 
damaged by delivery trucks that utilize this area.  It is the Environmental Professional’s 
opinion that there is a moderate threat of release of whatever materials are contained 
within the drum.  
7.2 CONTROLLED RECOGNIZED ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS 
Based on review of the available data, JCO has not identified any CRECs at the Site. 
7.3 HISTORIC RECOGNIZED ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITION (HREC) 
A HREC is defined by ASTM in the E1527-13 standard as “a past release of hazardous 
substance(s) that has been addressed to the satisfaction of the applicable regulatory authority or 
meeting unrestricted use criteria established by a regulatory authority, without subjecting the 
property to any required controls (for example, property use restrictions, activity and use 
limitations, institutional controls, or engineering controls).” HRECs are not considered RECs 
when the remaining environmental conditions are compliant with the most current regulatory 
criteria.  This assessment has revealed no evidence of HRECs in connection with the property.    
7.4 ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 The following items are not formal RECs either because there is not sufficient 
information to reasonably suspect that a release of contamination has occurred or because they 
are beyond the scope ASTM 1527-13.  However, it is the environmental professional’s opinion 
that these items should be considered when making decisions regarding the redevelopment of the 
Site.  
• Hazardous Building Materials: The potential presence of asbestos-containing building 
materials, lead-based paint, and/or PCB-containing building materials is beyond the 
scope of ASTM 1527-13.  However, given the age and construction of the buildings, 
these materials may be present in buildings on the Site.  In particular, floor tiles and 
hardboard located in the basement are suspected of being asbestos-containing and peeling 
paint was noted on surfaces throughout the older portions of the building.  The membrane 
roof may be PCB and/or asbestos containing.  An asbestos, lead paint, and PCB-building 
materials inspection by a licensed professional may be warranted if additional 
information is desired about the potential presence of these materials.  This information 
would be of particular importance should any renovation or reconstruction of the building 
require disturbance and or disposal of these potential hazardous material containing 
building materials.   
 
• Location in Industrial Area: The Site is located in downtown Barre in a historically 
industrialized area, adjacent to active railroad tracks.  Historically, a railroad spur was 
present at the Site as late as 1964.  The atmospheric deposition of industrial exhaust 
products may have resulted in surficial and/or deeper soil impacts at the Site.  If 
additional information regarding soil quality is desired, then collection of analytical 
samples may be warranted.  
 
• Trench Drains: Trench drains were observed in the loading dock area of the building, 
which was built following demolition of the former drycleaner.  Although, these drains 
were reportedly not associated with the former dry cleaner, they may have accepted 
potentially hazardous material from drips, spills, or leaks which may have occurred in the 
loading dock.  According to the property owner, these drains discharge to the City Sewer 
located to the north of the building.  It is possible that potentially impacted material from 
the trench drains has migrated to the sub-surface through cracks in the piping or through 
loose connections.  Therefore, it is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that there is 
a moderate chance that contamination may be associated with these drains and the 
associated piping.  If additional information regarding the drain contents and discharge 
location is desired, collection of sediment samples for analysis and/or efforts to determine 
condition of the drain piping may be warranted. 
 
• Petroleum Impacted Groundwater: During an investigation conducted at the Site in 
2002, petroleum constituents were identified in groundwater at concentrations in excess 
of VGES.  After a series of remedial actions were implemented at the Site, the petroleum 
concentrations in groundwater decreased, and as of 2008 the concentrations were 
reportedly below VGES.  Considering the data presented in the Heindel & Noyes 
Quarterly Reports suggest that the concentrations of petroleum constituents have 
decreased to below VGES in the areas which were sampled by Heindel & Noyes, it is the 
Environmental Professional’s opinion that this does not rise to the level of a REC.  
However, there is a slight chance that petroleum contamination in groundwater may exist 
in other portions of the Site (from the up-gradient Barre Shell site for example).  If 
additional information regarding petroleum constituent concentrations in groundwater is 
desired, collection of analytical groundwater samples may be warranted. 
 
• Monitoring Wells in Poor Condition: At least two monitoring wells at the Site were 
observed to be in extremely poor condition, with missing road box covers and no visible 
well plugs.  Because these wells are potential vertical migration pathways, it is possible 
that the wells are acting as a conduit for contaminated surficial material to impact the 
subsurface.  While it is the Environmental Professional’s opinion that this condition does 
not rise to the level of a REC, repair/rehabilitation/protection of damaged wells and/or 
appropriate decommissioning of the destroyed or unnecessary wells may be warranted. 
 
8.0  DATA GAPS/LIMITATIONS 
8.1 DATA GAPS 
The small (approximately 6x6 ft.) shed used to house the treatment system equipment for 
the post office vapor intrusion mitigation system was locked and could not be opened.  No 
evidence of releases was noted around this shed.  While not ideal, this data gap is not considered 
to be significant and does not affect the conclusions of this report.  
8.2 LIMITATIONS 
The conclusions of this ESA were based upon information obtained and made available 
to JCO from the following sources: the Barre City Clerk; EDR; the VTDEC; the Federal EPA; 
and from information gathered during the Site reconnaissance and interviews.  This information 
has been intended for the sole use of Capitol Candy and the CVRPC.  No other uses, expressed 
or implied, are warranted.  The design of the investigation was based on sound scientific 
techniques and experience with similar investigations.  Should additional information become 
available pertaining to environmental concerns that may be associated with the Site, the 
information should be made available to JCO so that we may re-evaluate our conclusions. 
