
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
The Johnson Company Inc. (JCO) of Montpelier, Vermont was retained by the Dickinson 
Development Corp. of Quincy, Massachusetts to conduct a Phase I Environmental Site 
Assessment (ESA) of the Former Grossman’s property located at 260 River St., Montpelier, VT 
(the Site).  JCO understands that the purpose of this Phase I ESA is to provide environmental due 
diligence in support of a potential property transaction and/or redevelopment project. 
 
This ESA was conducted by personnel from The Johnson Company who meet the definition of 
Environmental Professional as defined in 40 CFR Part 312. This ESA included reviewing 
existing information including available aerial photographs and topographic maps, determining 
the regulatory status of the Site, contacting appropriate personnel regarding past and present uses 
of the Site, investigating the potential for past releases of petroleum products and/or hazardous 
substances at the Site, and conducting a site reconnaissance to visually inspect accessible 
portions of the Site to ascertain the presence of recognized environmental conditions (RECs) in 
the form of past, present or potential release(s) of hazardous substances or petroleum products. In 
addition, these sources were investigated for the presence of historic recognized environmental 
conditions (HRECs) – a past release of hazardous substance(s) that has been addressed to 
residential use standards or unrestricted use criteria – and controlled recognized environmental 
conditions (CREC) – a past release of hazardous substance(s) that has been addressed to nonresidential
use standards and is subject to some type of control – at the Site.  As such, a HREC is 
not a REC when the remaining environmental conditions are compliant with the most current 
regulatory criteria; and a CREC is a REC. 
 
JCO has performed this Phase I ESA in conformance with the scope and limitations of ASTM 
Practice E-1527-13 of the Site. This assessment has revealed no evidence of HRECs, CRECs or 
RECs in connection with the property except for the following:  
 
1) The Site formerly hosted a manufactured gas plant (MGP) from approximately 1902-1957 
(operational between 1902 and 1949) and there is reason to suspect that environmental media 
at the Site may have been adversely impacted by residual by-products from this operation.  It 
should be noted that the area associated with the former MGP operation is located 
approximately 150 feet north of the former Grossman’s building. Sanborn fire insurance 
maps and historical photographs depict two former iron gas holders, a coal/coke storage area, 
a tar well, retorts, condensers, a tank in an engine room, a purifier house, and barrels stored 
on Site associated with the MGP. Also, a coal and coke storage area is identified on the 1925 
Sanborn map in what appears to the “footprint” of the former Grossman’s building. 
 
2) Current evidence of the former MGP operation was identified in the wooded area north of the 
former Grossman’s building during the August 23, 2016 site reconnaissance visit, which 
included:  
a) A dilapidated rectangular concrete structure that appeared to have visual and olfactory 
evidence of coal tar within and immediately surrounding the structure; 
b) A pile of approximately 20 corroded barrels of unknown contents and varying size and 
condition. These barrels were identified in the northeast corner of the property along the 
river bank under thick brush and undergrowth;  
c) Two buried concrete structures (possibly the “tar well” and/or “tar pit” as per the Sanborn 
maps) was identified and evidence of coal tar was observed in shallow soil within these 
structures; 
d) Miscellaneous pipes, containers (two 55-gallon drums and 10 gallon pail) and metal 
objects, were observed; 
 
3) A complaint filed in 2008 to VTDEC suggesting that sheens were observed in the Winooski 
River in the immediate vicinity of the Site, follow-up evaluation by VTDEC determined that 
the sheens were biological in nature; however, supplemental river water sampling did suggest 
the presence of petroleum constituents; 
 
4) A complaint filed in 2009 by a former Grossman’s employee suggested that pools of standing 
oil were present in the wooded area north of the current building;  
 
5) A former rail spur is located in the western portion of the Site, which was presumably used to 
transport coal and other material.  A pile of older vintage rail road ties, which may have been 
treated with creosote, is located towards the far northern end of this former rail spur.  
Furthermore an active rail corridor also forms the western boundary of the Site.  Rail roads 
are often used to transport potentially hazardous material, locomotive engine exhaust 
historically tend to deposit partially burnt hydrocarbons on surrounding areas, and rail lines 
are often maintained with herbicides; 
  
6) Residual petroleum contamination from neighboring properties may pose a potential risk to 
the property. Former Walker Motors is located on the opposite side of River Street/Route 2 
from the Site and is a Vermont listed hazardous site (SMS #880199 and #20033108).  The 
downgradient extent of dissolved phase petroleum contamination has not been defined and 
may extend under Route 2 in the direction of the 260 River Street property; 
 
7) Two floor drains and an onsite septic system (located south of the former Grossman’s 
building) were identified.  It is unknown if potentially hazardous materials were introduced 
to this system; 
 
8) A utility pole with three mounted transformers is located southeast of the former Grossman’s 
building.  Although no staining was observed in soil beneath the transformers according to 
Green Mountain Power these transformers were installed in 1965 and may contain PCBcontaining
materials;  
 
The following item is beyond the scope of a Phase I ESA (as defined by ASTM 1527-13) and  is 
therefore not considered a formal REC; however this item should be considered as a potential 
cost during any future construction and renovation planning: 
 
1. Asbestos-containing building materials, lead-based paint, and/or PCB-containing 
building materials may be present in Site structures.  Building materials (asbestos, 
lead paint, and PCB) inspections by a licensed professional may be warranted if 
additional information is desired regarding these potential concerns. 
 
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
The Johnson Company Inc. (JCO), of Montpelier, Vermont was retained by the 
Dickinson Development Corp. to conduct a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment (ESA) of the 
former Grossman’s property located at 260 River St., Montpelier, VT (the Site).  The location of 
the Site is depicted in Figure 1.  
 
The purpose of this ESA was to identify Recognized Environmental Conditions (RECs) 
associated with the Site that may suggest the presence or likely presence of hazardous substances 
or petroleum products resulting from conditions associated with an existing release, past release, 
or  a material threat of a release at the property.  JCO understands that the Dickinson 
Development Corp. is interested in possibly redeveloping the Site; this Phase I ESA is intended 
to provide environmental due diligence in support of that action. 
 
This ESA included reviewing existing information made available and/or that was 
reasonably ascertainable regarding current and past usage of the property, determining the Site’s 
regulatory status, contacting appropriate personnel regarding current and past uses of the Site, 
investigating past, present and/or the potential for releases of hazardous substances at the Site, 
and conducting a reconnaissance to visually inspect the accessible portions of the Site.  This ESA 
was performed by personnel from JCO who meet the definition of Environmental Professional as 
defined in 40 CFR Part 312, in conformance within the scope and limitations of ASTM E 152713
in compliance with 40 CFR Part 312, Standards and Practices for All Appropriate Inquiries. 
   
Credentials of JCO personnel involved with the preparation of this ESA are included as 
Appendix 1. 
 
2.0 SITE DESCRIPTION 
The Site consists of a 6.01-acre parcel located at 260 River Street, Montpelier, Vermont, 
05602 and is located between River Street (Route 2) and the Winooski River. The Site is 
currently a vacant lot with one uninhabited building constructed in 1965 (former Grossman’s) 
and a small wooden storage shed in the northwest corner of the parking area. Evidence of a 
former manufactured gas operation was observed in the wooded area approximately 150 ft north 
of former Grossman’s building. Figure 2 shows the location of the Site relative to its 
surroundings.  A Site Sketch showing various site features and areas of potential environmental 
concern is provided as Figure 3.  
2.1 SETTING AND SURROUNDING DEVELOPMENT 
The Site is abutted to the south and east by the Winooski River, to the west by railroad 
tracks, River Street (Route 2) and Formula Ford (former Walker Motors), and to the north by 
both open and wooded land. The Site and surrounding properties are depicted on Figure 2. 
 
Topographically, the ground surface is relatively flat and located in the 100 year flood 
plain zone of the Winooski River according to the EDR Radius Report. The majority of the Site 
is covered by an uninhabited building, a small shed, a partially paved parking lot, and a 
grassy/wooded area.  
2.2 HEATING, WATER AND SEWER 
The Site is currently served by the City of Montpelier Water Division. An on-site septic 
system is located to the south of the current building and was historically used to treat 
wastewater onsite. When the current building was operational it was heated by propane fired hot 
air furnaces. Three 800-gallon above ground propane tanks were reportedly located in a fenced 
area southeast of the building, but are no longer present. Storm drains are present in 
approximately the center of the parking area that may drain into the wooded area north of the 
main building based on the observation of a drain pipe exiting the parking lot in line with the 
storm drain. Electricity to the property is provided by Green Mountain Power via overhead lines.   
 
2.3 GEOLOGY AND HYDROGEOLOGY 
According to the EDR Radius Report, the soils at the Site are primarily categorized as 
Class A hydrologic group with high infiltration rates and excessively drained sands and gravels.  
The area is mapped as Eugeosynclinal Deposits. The direction of groundwater flow was not 
directly measured as part of this ESA, but considering the surrounding topography and proximity 
to the Winooski River an easterly hydraulic gradient, towards the river is likely. 
 
2.4 THREATENED SPECIES AND WETLANDS 
Vermont Agency of Natural Resources (VTANR) Natural Resources Atlas (NRA) shows 
no wetlands located within 0.25-miles of the Site. The VTANR NRA shows six Class 2 wetlands 
between approximately 0.5 – and 1-mile of the Site, the largest being south of the Site, upstream 
at the confluence of the Winooski River and Stevens Brook (VTDEC1, 2016). 
 
The VTANR NRA identified one threatened species as rare in Vermont (invertebrate 
animal) within 1.0 mile of the Site, downstream to the Northeast along the Winooski River. The 
specific species is not listed (VTDEC1, 2016). 
3.0 SITE HISTORY AND REVIEW OF EXISTING INFORMATION 
 Site history was reviewed using land records, USGS topographic maps, aerial 
photographs, Sanborn fire insurance maps, city directories, interviews, and prior investigation 
reports and work plans. Further information was collected through interviews with the current 
owner representative, past owner/occupant, state/local officials, and neighboring or nearby 
property owner/occupant.  
3.1 HISTORICAL REVIEW 
3.1.1 Land Records 
A search of the Land Records in the Montpelier City Clerk’s office was conducted on 
August 23, 2016. It should be noted that JCO staff are not title search professionals, and 
 
therefore a formal land records review should be conducted by a qualified title search attorney.  
Details of historical ownership of the Site are summarized in Table 1.  
  
3.1.2 USGS Topographic Maps 
The  1921, 1922, 1951, 1957, 1978, 1988 and 2012 United States Geological Survey 
(USGS) topographic quadrangle maps for the target area were provided by Environmental Data 
Resources, Inc. (EDR) and reviewed as part of this ESA (EDR, 2016). Map series reviewed were 
15-minute (1921, 1922, 1924, 1951, and 1957), and 7.5 minute (1978, 1988, and 2012) 
quadrangles.  These maps are included in Appendix 2.  Areas directly north of the Site were not 
included in the 1922, 1951, 1957, 1978, and 1988 maps. A structure, presumably the current 
building on the Site, is only shown on the 1978 and 1988 maps with an average surface elevation 
of 553.50 ft. above sea level. Structures are not visible on the Site in the other topographic maps 
provided (1921, 1922, 1951, or 1957, or 2012). 
 
3.1.3 Aerial Photographs 
Aerial photographs from 1942, 1973, 1976, 1986, 1992, 1996, 2006, 2008, 2009, 2011, 
and 2012 were provided by EDR and reviewed as part of this ESA (EDR, 2016). The aerial 
photos are included in Appendix 2. The 1942 photograph shows the approximate location of two 
former circular gas holder tanks north of the main structure on the Site that are no longer present 
in the 1973 photograph.  When quality allowed for clear interpretation of Site features, 
photographs after 1973 appeared to generally show Site features in their current configuration. 
Photographs from 1986 and 1992 are of poorer quality and structures cannot be identified. In the 
2008 photograph, the Site is blocked by cloud cover and therefore do not provide any useful 
information. In the 2009 photograph, a new roundabout is constructed on Route 2 southwest of 
the Site and several soil stockpiles appear to be present on the Site.  The 2011 photograph  
suggests that the stockpiles were no longer present and a new access road to the Site appears to 
have been created off of the roundabout. In the 2012 photograph, the Site appears to be in the 
current layout as observed during the Site reconnaissance visit.     
 
 
Aerial photographs of the Winooski River from 1927 and 2004 were found in the 
University of Vermont Landscape Change Program Digital Archive and are included in 
Appendix 3 of historical photographs. These two photographs show the Site between the bend in 
the river and the railroad tracks. The archive indicated that “in the lower half of the 1927 photo 
between Rt 2 and the Winooski River you can see the circular tank of the former coal 
gasification plant service the City of Montpelier. The site was recently used as a lumber dealer 
now a car storage lot.” This area of the aerial photograph is enhanced and shown as Photo 2 in 
Appendix 3 as well to visually see these structures. The aerial photograph from 2004 shows the 
same area with substantial development. The bridges have been replaced and several large 
buildings and parking lots have been added to the area along the river. Additionally, the 2004 
photograph shows the current vacant building on the Site, but the area associated with former 
MGP related structures is covered by trees.  
    
3.1.4 Sanborn Fire Insurance Maps 
Holdings of the Sanborn Library, LLC collection have been searched for the Site, and fire 
insurance maps and coverage for the target property were found on the 1905, 1909, 1915, 1925, 
1945, 1964 maps (EDR, 2016).  The maps prior to 1964 depict the Site as Capitol City Gas 
Company (CCGC). The 1905 map shows the main CCGC building and one circular iron gas 
holder to the west of the building. The 1909 map depicts the same circular iron gasholder as the 
1905 map, but it is labeled “gasometer”. There is also another circular feature of similar size 
labeled “iron tar well” to the north of the main building, and one rectangular area labeled as “tar 
in barrels” west of the building. The 1915 map labels both circular areas as “iron gas holders” 
and the area labeled as “tar in barrels” (1909) is relabeled as a “tar well”. In the 1925 map, a 
coke and coal storage area is evident to the south of the main building, and presumably in the 
“foot print” of the current building. The 1945 map depicts the last known layout and former 
structures associated with CCGC consistent with the layout in 1925.  The 1964 map only shows 
the former building with a portion of it labeled dilapidated and all other site features are  
removed. According to land records, the current building on the Site was built in 1965 and is 
located south of the former CCGC building. The Sanborn fire insurance maps are included in 
Appendix 2. 
 
3.1.5 City Directories 
The Cole Information Sources and Mannings Street Directories for the Site were 
provided by EDR for years 1961, 1967, 1973, 1992, 1995, 1999, 2003, 2008, and 2013 (see 
Appendix 2).  Only the 1999 Cole Information Services list the Site with address 260 River St., 
and shows that “HMG”, presumably Hospital Mortgage Group from JCO’s land record search, 
as the owner at the Site. The Site as 260 River St. does not appear on any other listings provided 
in the EDR report; however, “Grossman’s” is listed as 200 River Street in the 1967 Manning’s 
City Directory. 
 
3.1.6 Environmental Questionnaire 
JCO’s standard Environmental Questionnaire was provided to Mr. Lee Beavin at the 
request of Dickinson Development Corp., considering Lee was the most knowledgeable person 
available regarding the site history. . Mr. Beavin is a former Grossmans employee who worked 
on the Site between 1974 and1996, when Grossman’s closed.   Lee reviewed the previous 
Environmental Questionnaire that was completed for the 1995 JCO Phase I ESA and stated that 
nothing had changed with the exception of two items. Mr. Beavin indicated that in “Spring 2010, 
I (Mr. Beavin) removed the floor tiles and made a pile outside. I (Mr. Beavin) was not aware 
they were asbestos tiles” (see question No. 46) and in “1999 some expanding foam Great Stuff 
was used up high on the walls to fill cracks” (see question No. 47). The updated page of the 
questionnaire was received by JCO on August 16, 2016 and is included in Appendix 4.   
3.2 INTERVIEWS 
3.2.1 Current Owner 
In his response to the User Questionnaire (see Section 6.0) Mr. Carlos Camarotti, Vice 
President of 260 River Corporation, indicated that the property had been generally vacant since  
the 1990s, but was used as snow dump by the City of Montpelier and a parking lot for a local car 
dealer. 
  
3.2.2 Past Owners/Occupants/Employees 
Mr. Lee Beavin accompanied JCO staff during the August 23, 2016 Site reconnaissance 
visit, and answered questions regarding the history of the property and environmental conditions 
at the Site to the best of his abilityDuring the Site walkover, Mr. Beavin indicated Grossman’s 
operated as lumber retailer from 1965 to1996. Mr. Beavin also indicated that in the spring of 
2010 he removed the floor tiles from the building and made the pile outside. He was unaware at 
the time if they were asbestos containing. This change to the environmental questionnaire from 
1995 is noted in Appendix 4. 
 
As part of the JCO October 1995 Phase I ESA, an environmental questionnaire was 
completed by Mr. Richard Halverson, the Manager of Property Development for Grossmans, Inc. 
The completed questionnaire is included as Appendix 4.  
 
Mr. Donald Rowan, a former employee of a propane distributor who was familiar with 
the site, was interviewed by Kurt Muller of JCO on September 1, 2016. Although Mr. Rowan 
was not an employee of the former CCGC while in operation at 260 River Street, nor did he 
recall ever visiting or seeing the Site while it was an operating MGP, he was associated with the 
CCGC as a propane distributor for the company. Mr. Rowan indicated that CCGC was formed in 
1902 and manufactured and sold gas from coal until approximately 1946. Based on his review of 
historical meeting minutes and financial statements that were in his possession, Mr. Rowan 
indicated that coke, tar, and other by-products of the coal gasification process were sold during 
the operation. According to Mr. Rowan, CCGC ran the coal gasification plant at the Site until 
1946 when a propane-air system was built and the former plant was dismantled.  The old gas 
plant “was sold” (process of selling may have begun during this time) in Jan. 1948 and by Sept. 
1948 most of the equipment had been removed from the property. Mr. Rowan also indicated that 
 
the last financial statement showing income from tar and coke was in Dec. 1948. By September 
1957 the 260 River St. property was sold to Hill Martin Corp. of Montpelier consistent with 
JCO’s land records review.  Mr. Rowan provided JCO with eight historical photographs that 
were taken in February of 1933 of the Site while CCGC was operational (see Appendix 3). These 
photographs were used to better ascertain the layout of the Site, particularly the iron gas holders, 
old retort building, an A-framed building, tar pits, and evidence of barrels/drums. 
 
3.2.3 State/Local Officials 
JCO interviewed Chief Anthony Facos (Montpelier Police Chief since 2007) by 
telephone on August 19, 2016 and asked if he was aware of any hazardous materials incidents at 
the Site.  Chief Facos indicated that he is not aware of any complaints regarding spills, dumping 
or other releases of hazardous materials at the Site and has not been inside the building on the 
Site in a number of years (Facos, 2016). 
 
JCO interviewed Chief Robert Gowans (Montpelier Fire Chief of 5 years and 38 years 
total tenure with the department) by telephone on August 25, 2016. Mr. Gowans searched his 
records and did not find any reports of spills, dumping or other releases of hazardous materials at 
the Site since former Grossman’s occupied the Site. His records did not go back any further past 
the former Grossman’s ownership. He also indicated that there were no fires reported at the Site 
either (Gowans, 2016). 
 
Mr. Chris Lumbra (Montpelier Building Inspector/Health Officer) was contacted by JCO 
and a voicemail was left on August 19 and August25, 2016, but there has been no response as of 
the date of this report. 
 
Mr. Paul Carnahan of The Vermont Historical Society in Barre, VT was contacted by 
JCO on August 25, 2016 regarding any historical information, maps, or photographs about the 
Site. Mr. Carnahan indicated that he did not know of any information about the site. 
 
 
Mr. Thomas McArdle (Montpelier Public Works Director) was interviewed by JCO on 
September 8, 2016, regarding the 2009 roundabout construction project at the intersection of 
Route 2 and Route 302.  Specifically, JCO asked Mr. McArdle if soil generated during the 2009 
construction effort was stored on the Site, considering the 2009 aerial appeared to show a soil 
stockpile(s) on the Site.  Mr. McArdle identified that no soil originating from anywhere other 
than the 260 River Street parcel was stored on the Site.   Furthermore, Mr. McArdle did identify 
that soil on the Site may have been relocated during the construction of the new access road to 
the Site.  
 
3.2.4 Neighboring or Nearby Property Owner/Occupant    
On August 24, 2016 Mr. Mark Saber of Formula Ford at 265 River St. (abutting 
landowner) was interviewed by telephone.  Mr. Saber has owned the abutting property to the 
southwest since 2009.  Mr. Saber was not aware of any incidents involving spills or release of 
hazardous chemicals or any other threats to human health or the environment at the Site and 
indicated that his property was formerly Walker Motors (Saber, 2016). 
3.3 PRIOR INVESTIGATIONS AND PLANS 
 A chronology of correspondence and actions from the VTDEC for the Site was obtained 
from the file review request. The chronology lists history from October 1995 to October 2015 
associated with former Grossman’s/Montpelier MGP Spill #2009WMD194. This chronology is 
included in Appendix 5 and is summarized in the sections below. 
3.3.1 The Johnson Company Phase I ESA, 1995 
 In October 1995, JCO performed a Phase I ESA (see Appendix 6) of the Site for 
Grossman’s Incorporated which identified that the Site was a former coal gasification plant and 
two neighboring properties (Walker Motors and Interstate Equipment) that had the potential to 
adversely impact subsurface conditions of the Site.  The 1995 Phase I ESA included a limited 
soil screening effort, which included four shallow soil samples collected for headspace screening 
 
using a PID. Soil sample SS-1 was collected from the concrete foundation, located east of the 
“tank” (referred to as concrete structure in this report), at a depth of 0.5-1.0 ft. and PID readings 
were 1.6 parts per million by volume (ppmV). The sample was noted to have a noticeable 
petroleum odor and contained brick and glass pieces. Soil sample SS-2 was collected east of the 
concrete “tank” at depths of 0.5-2 ft. (PID reading of 7.8 ppmV) and 2-3.8 ft. (PID 1.1 ppmV). 
Groundwater was noted in the borehole approximately 2 feet below ground surface (fbgs). 
Sample SS-3 consisted of sediment collected from surface water ponding east of the concrete 
“tank” with a noticeable petroleum odor with PID headspace reading of 1.1 ppmV. Soil sample 
SS-4 was collected east of the concrete “tank” in an area proximate to the eastern gas holder with 
a PID headspace screening response of 20 ppmV. JCO recommended a Phase II ESA that would 
include sampling and laboratory analysis of soil and groundwater. 
3.3.2 October 6, 2008, VTDEC Spill #2008WMD494 
In 2008, while Stone Environmental Inc. (SEI) was conducting an unrelated river 
assessment for the Friends of the Winooski River, three water samples were collected near the 
bank of the Site and sent for laboratory analysis. During this same effort, SEI also reported that 
sheens were observed along the shoreline of the Site and a complaint was reported to VTDEC by 
SEI in October 2008 (see Appendix 7). Analytical results for two of the three samples collected 
and a map showing sample locations are included in the 2010 VHB 260 River St. Site 
Investigation Work Plan (see Section 3.3.6 below). JCO obtained this document as part of a VTDEC
file review request and is included in Appendix 8. Only two of the three water samples had 
results provided.  Sample WR-0090 was collected from the river bank that is proximate to the 
northeastern corner of former Grossmans building. The laboratory analytical results indicated 
non-detectable concentrations of gasoline range hydrocarbons, diesel range hydrocarbons at a 
concentration of 0.3 mg/L, and extractable petroleum hydrocarbons at a concentration of 0.08 
mg/L. There were also non-detectable concentrations of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
(PAHs). Sample WR-0100 was collected from what appears to be the river bank proximate to the 
former MGP. The laboratory analytical results indicated gasoline range hydrocarbons at a 
concentration of 1.2 mg/L, diesel range hydrocarbons at a concentration of 1.8 mg/L, and 
 
extractable petroleum hydrocarbons at a concentration of 0.45 mg/L. There were also nondetectable
concentrations of PAHs. In a map prepared by SEI on October 9, 2008 (included in 
Appendix 8) all three sampling locations from the analytical report above are listed as seeps. 
After receiving the complaint from SEI, Marc Roy of the VTDEC investigated the sheens and 
determined they were biological in nature. This spill was closed on October 23, 2008. 
3.3.4 April 27, 2009- VTDEC Spill #2009WMD194 
A complaint was filed at the VTDEC against the Site by a Former Grossman’s employee 
(anonymous) who worked at Grossman’s “28 years ago”. The complaint reported observing 
pools of tar in woods on premises a few feet across. The responsible party was listed as Capital 
City Gas, Inc. and the type of contaminant listed was coal tar with an approximate date of 
incident reported as 1980. The complaint was taken April 27, 2009 by Matt Moran of VTDEC. 
The complaint form is included in Appendix 9. This complaint resulted in a 1
st letter that was 
sent on June 19, 2009 by Matt Moran of VTDEC to Lawrence Rothstein, President of 260 River 
Corporation requesting information that may be related to environmental conditions at the site, 
including any Phase I or II Environmental Site Assessments. The letter highlights concerns related 
to the previous coal gasification plant, the anonymous complaint in 2009, the complaint in 2008 
from Stone Environmental, and the Friends of Winooski River work. It also mentioned the 
development of the roundabout project and that adjoining properties “each had residual 
petroleum contamination from former leaking underground storage tanks that affected the 
roundabout project” supporting the fact that neighboring properties may be RECs. This letter is 
included in Appendix 10. 
3.3.5 November 30, 2009- VTDEC “Site Investigation Request Letter” 
 A site investigation request letter was sent from Matt Moran, VTDEC to Lawrence 
Rothstein, President of 260 River Corporation requesting specific investigatory actions be 
initiated at the Site.  This request from VTDEC was based on JCO’s 1995 Phase I Environmental 
Site Assessment, Fire Insurance Maps, general institutional knowledge regarding contaminants 
of concern at MGP site, and previous complaints. The letter requested the following actions: 
 
• A professional survey to map out former MGP structures;  
• A geophysical survey to identify buried structures not identified by Sanborn Maps;  
• Advance a sufficient number of soil borings to investigate the former iron gas holders, tar 
well, swale to northeast, concrete tank, and former building footprint (retorts, purifier, 
tank listed next to boiler room); 
•  Assess soil in borings by performing onsite soil screening for volatiles using a PID and 
metals using X-Ray fluorescence and collect confirmatory soil samples for laboratory 
analysis; 
• Install at least six monitoring wells and collect groundwater samples; 
• Collect samples of sludge  from concrete tank, sediment and water samples from the seep 
locations identified by Stone Environmental; 
• Screen near surface soils with PID and XRF, and collect soil samples in areas of soil 
staining and stressed vegetation;  
• Specific laboratory analyses requested include: volatile organic compounds (VOCs),  
Semi-VOCs, priority pollutant metals, and cyanide; and 
• Preparation of a summary report.   
 
A copy of this Site Investigation request letter is included in Appendix 11. 
3.3.6 August 5
th, 2010- Site Investigation Plan VHB Pioneer 
 In 2010, VHB Pioneer prepared a site investigation work plan for Primmer Piper 
Eggleston & Cramer (PPEC), and submitted it to VTDEC in response to the 2009 Site 
Investigation request letter. This work plan included information regarding the previous 
sampling performed by Stone Environmental Inc. for the Friends of Winooski River in 2008 
discussed in Section 3.3.2. The work plan proposed global positioning system survey, 12 test pits 
with soil sample collection and analysis, and the installation of six groundwater monitoring wells 
with sampling and analysis. The work plan used a railway evaluation plan from Central Vermont 
Railway Co, 1917 superimposed on a modern orthophoto to identify locations of the former gas 
plant. A GPS survey would allow these locations to be staked and propose test pit sites in the 
field.  According to correspondence with VTDEC, this work plan was never implemented. A 
copy of this work plan including the analytical laboratory results of the Friends of the Winooski 
River findings is provided in Appendix 8. 
 
4.0 REGULATORY STATUS 
4.1 ENVIRONMENTAL LIENS 
 
A search of the files at the Montpelier City Clerk’s office on August 23, 2016 revealed no 
environmental liens on the property.  However, it should be noted that JCO are not title 
attorneys, and therefore recommends a qualified attorney revisit the land records to confirm no 
environmental liens exist for the Site. 
4.2 FEDERAL REGULATORY FILES 
 A database radius search report was provided by EDR and the information presented in 
the following sub-sections was taken from the EDR Radius Map report unless otherwise stated.  
The EDR Radius Map Report is included in Appendix 2. 
4.2.1 Federal National Priority List (NPL) 
The Site is not listed on the National Priority List (NPL), i.e., Superfund site, nor is any 
property within a one mile search radius of the Site. 
4.2.1.1 Federal Delisted NPL sites  
  Neither the Site nor any other properties within the 1 mile search radius are 
delisted Federal NPL sites. 
4.2.2 Federal Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability 
Information System (CERCLIS) List 
The Site does not appear on the federal CERCLIS database.  There are no federal 
CERCLIS sites listed within 0.5 miles of the Site.  
4.2.2.1 No Further Remedial Action Planned (NFRAP) site list 
Neither the Site nor any sites within a 0.5 mile search radius are listed as 
CERCLIS designated sites with a no further remedial action planned (NFRAP) status. 
 
4.2.3 Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Generators 
The Site is not listed as a federal RCRA generator by either the Waste Management 
Division or the EPA. There are two federal RCRA generators listed nearby properties, 265 River 
Street (adjacent property located across River Street to the west) and 55 Country Club Road 
(property located on opposite/east side of river and south of Site). Both are conditionally exempt 
small quantity generators (CESQG) meaning they generate less than 100 kg of hazardous waste 
or less than 1 kg of acutely hazardous waste per month.  
4.2.3.1 RCRA Corrective Action Sites (CORRACTS) List 
The Site is not on the list of RCRA Corrective Action sites for EPA Region 1, nor 
is any property within a one mile search radius of the Site. 
4.2.4 RCRA Treatment, Storage and Disposal (TSD) Facilities 
There are not transportation and disposal (TSD) facilities listed within a 0.5 mile search 
radius of the Site. 
4.2.5 Federal Institutional Control/Engineering Registries 
There are no federally-registered controls within a 0.5 mile search radius of the Site. 
4.2.6 Federal Emergency Response Notification (ERNS) List 
The Site does not appear on the Federal ERNS list. 
4.2.7 EPA On-Scene Coordinator Emergency Environmental Response 
The EPA On-scene Coordinator (EPA OSC) program performs rapid responses to remove 
direct contact risks by trespassers or the public.  The EPA OSC records are not part of the 
standard EDR database search, therefore JCO conducted a separate search of OSC records.  As 
of August 15, 2016, no OSC sites were listed within a 1.0-mile search radius of the Site 
(EPAOSC, 2016). 
4.3 STATE/TRIBAL REGULATORY FILES 
 
There are no recognized tribal or American Indian-owned lands within Vermont; 
therefore, no tribal files were searched during this ESA.  
 
4.3.1 Hazardous Sites List 
 A review of the Vermont hazardous waste sites list, as provided by EDR, has revealed 
that the Site itself is not a Vermont listed hazardous site; however, there are nine Vermont listed 
sites within approximately 1 mile of the Site (Table 2). Of these sites, three are reported as 
inactive, two are active and considered low priority, three are active and considered medium 
priority, and one is active with a high priority status (VTDEC1, 2016).  Based on the surrounding 
topography, contaminant profiles, and media affected, three of the hazardous waste sites listed 
above were identified as sites of interest and are discussed in more detail below.   
4.3.1.1 Former Walker Motors (SMS #880199 and #20033108)  
The Former Walker Motors automobile dealership (currently Formula Ford 
dealership) was located west of the Site, directly across Route 2 and topographically up 
gradient from the Site. Two 1,000 gallon gasoline underground storage tanks (UST), 
circa the 1950s, were removed from the site in 1988 due to a suspected gasoline release. 
Soil removed from the base of both UST excavations displayed a grey, greasy appearance 
and had a strong petroleum odor. During the UST removal effort, contaminated soil was 
returned to the tank excavation pit and an investigation was requested by VTDEC (see 
SMS #880199). 
 
 The property was again listed with the VTDEC as hazardous waste site 
SMS#20033108 as a result of contaminated soil and groundwater observed during the 
removal of USTs in 2003. Two 4,000 gallon fuel oil USTs were removed between April 
and October 2003 due to suspected leaks and were replaced with an above ground storage 
tank (AST). Olfactory and visual evidence of petroleum impacts were observed in soils 
associated with both UST excavations. Sheen and olfactory evidence of petroleum impact 
was observed in the groundwater during the October 2003 UST removal effort. Oily 
sheens were also noted in a nearby catch basin that leads to the Winooski River and 
booms were installed in the catch basin in 2003.  
 
 
The follow up investigation determined that petroleum contamination in 
groundwater appeared to be travelling eastward and was entering a swale leading to the 
Winooski River and free product recovery was performed. Biennial groundwater 
sampling of over twenty monitoring wells confirmed groundwater flow direction to be in 
an easterly direction from Walker Motors towards the Winooski River and 260 River 
Street site. Several wells were abandoned and/or damaged with currently 12 wells 
remaining. No free product was detected in any of the wells gauged during the 2012 and 
2013 monitoring activities. Two of the twelve monitoring wells located in the former 
parts department nearest to the Route 2 roundabout had groundwater concentrations that 
exceeded the Vermont Groundwater Enforcement Standards (VGES) in the most recent 
sampling report from 2013. The report stated “With the exception of monitoring wells that 
occasionally contain free product, contaminant concentrations at the auto body shop are 
generally stable or decreasing”, but there is still concern as “The downgradient extent of 
dissolved-phase petroleum contamination at the parts department has not been defined 
and may extend off the property beneath Route 2”. Former Walker Motors is listed as a 
low priority site; however, its proximity to 260 River Street and the lack of a defined 
downgradient extent of impact, presents a potential risk of subsurface petroleum impact 
to the Site.   
4.3.1.2 Cody Chevrolet (SMS #20114235) 
Contamination of gasoline, heating oil, other petroleum and waste oil was 
discovered in November 2011 during the removal of an oil water separator, two heating 
oil UST and excavation near gasoline UST. VTDEC issued a “First Letter” on January 
12, 2012 requesting additional investigation, and subsequently listed this property as high 
priority.  Investigation work was conducted to further define and remove the 
contaminated soil.   VTDEC received an Excavation Summary and groundwater 
monitoring report in January 2016 that recommended continued monitoring and natural 
attenuation; these reports were not accessible to JCO on the VTDEC web database. 
 
 
Cody Chevrolet is located more than ½-mile from the Site and therefore highly 
unlikely to have adversely impacted the 260 River Street property; however, it should be 
noted that this property is located up-stream along a branch of the Winooski River. 
4.3.1.3 Interstate Equipment (SMS #921333) 
Subsurface and surficial historical spills and releases have been investigated at 
this site. In May 1993, two monitoring wells were installed at the north end of the 
property to assess groundwater quality in the area of a former gasoline fueling station. 
VOC contaminated groundwater was detected in all monitoring wells. Soil staining and 
waste oil drums were located in the storage shed area; surface soil samples were collected 
in the vicinity and contamination from VOCs was detected. Soil samples collected from a 
swale along the banks of the Winooski River and water sampled from a stormwater outlet 
into the Winooski River both contained detectable concentrations of metals and VOCs. 
   
Two gasoline USTs were removed in 1995 from the north end of the property 
(1,000 gallon and 20,000 gallon). As a result of the roundabout project (intersection of 
Route 302 and Route 2), the City of Montpelier now owns part of the property where 
residual soil contamination exists. A Notice to the City of Montpelier Land Records was 
issued for the site on March 9, 2010.  The notice identified that regardless of the presence 
of residual subsurface soil and/or groundwater contamination that remains on the cityowned
portion of site, this condition does not represent a significant risk to human health 
or the environment.  The notice also indicated that the site is to be closed and VTDEC 
will issue site management activities complete (SMAC) designation; however, as of 
September 8, 2016, the VTDEC web database does not have the SMAC letter, nor does it 
provide a site closure date, which suggests that site may remain active. Although it does 
not appear that a significant threat exists from the Interstate Equipment site, given its 
close proximity to 260 River Street, historical impacts to groundwater, and the 
 
disturbance/reuse of site soil as backfill during the roundabout project, it should be noted 
that a potential risk to the Site exists.   
4.3.2 Underground Storage Tank (UST) List 
 
There are no registered active underground storage tanks (USTs) at the Site; however, a 
review of the Vermont UST list, as provided by EDR has revealed that there are four Vermont 
UST sites within approximately 0.25 miles of the target property. Furthermore, a review of the 
Vermont leaking UST (LUST) list, as provided by EDR, has revealed that there are five VT 
LUST sites within approximately 0.5 miles of the target property. The LUSTs of interest have 
either been described above in Section 4.3.1 or received site closure designation from VTDEC 
and are therefore should not pose a significant risk to the Site. 
4.3.3 Spills List 
According to the VT DEC spills database, a spill was reported at the Site on October 10, 
2008 (Report # WMD 494) and on April 27, 2009 (Report # WMD194). In October 2008, sheens 
were found along shoreline of the Winooski River by Stone Environmental with evidence of 
seeps. Marc Roy of VTDEC was called to scene and determined the sheen was biological in 
nature and the issue was closed October 23, 2008.  
 
In April 2009, a complaint was received by VTDEC and is summarized as follows: “With 
current roundabout development at Route 302/2, former Grossman’s (the Site) was being used 
for staging and concern for redevelopment in areas that are contaminated. Three separate areas 
with small pools of coal tar on ground were reported from former MGP” (see section 3.3.4). The 
VTDEC spill manager for this complaint was James Donaldson, but no record of a VTDEC 
follow-up inspection was identified.   However, the spill report does suggest that  VTDEC was 
evaluating the next steps and possible inclusion into the Brownfield program and/or use of EPA. 
 
4.3.4 Landfills 
There are no certified landfills within a 0.5 mile search radius of the Site. (VTDEC1, 
2013). 
4.3.5 Institutional Controls/Engineering Controls Registries 
The EDR report revealed no institutional and/or engineering controls for the Site or 
within a 0.5 mile radius of the Site. 
4.3.6 Voluntary Cleanup Sites 
Vermont does not specifically have a voluntary cleanup program, but the Brownfield 
Reuse Environmental Liability Limitation Act (BRELLA, effective July 1, 2008), acts as one for 
non-responsible parties. There are no reported voluntary cleanup sites within 0.5 miles of the 
Site. 
4.3.7 Brownfield Sites 
The Site is/ is not considered a Brownfield Site, but is under consideration as per the 
spills report #WMD194 (see Section 4.3.3). According to the ANR Atlas, no other Brownfield 
sites are located within 0.5 miles of the site. 
4.4 LOCAL REGULATORY FILES  
4.4.1 Fire Department/Town Health Officer/Police 
Details regarding interviews with local officials are provided in Section 3.2.3. 
4.4.2 Local Electric Utility Company (Polychlorinated biphenyls) 
 Electricity to the property is served by Green Mountain Power via overhead lines.  
During the Site walkover, a utility pole with three transformers was observed to the southeast of 
the main building.  No staining was noted on the asphalt surrounding the pole (Green Mountain 
Power Pole Tag #8836, Location code 36-001), but some darkness and/or staining on the bottom 
of one of the transformers was noted.  No blue “PCB-Free” stickers were noted on any of the 
 
transformers.  On August 29, 2016 Tim Upton of Green Mountain Power was contacted by JCO, 
and indicated that these transformers were installed in 1965 and may contain PCB-containing 
materials.  
4.5 NON-AAI/ASTM SCOPE CONSIDERATIONS 
4.5.1 Asbestos and Lead Paint Issues 
An asbestos and lead based paint inspection was not performed as part of this Phase I 
ESA.  However, given the age and construction of the buildings it is possible that asbestos 
containing materials, particularly the floor tiles that were removed and remained piled outside 
the building, and/or lead-based paint are present in the on-site buildings. 
4.6 HISTORIC RECOGNIZED ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITION (HREC) 
 A HREC is defined by ASTM in the E1527-13 standard as “a past release of hazardous 
substance(s) that has been addressed to the satisfaction of the applicable regulatory authority or 
meeting unrestricted use criteria established by a regulatory authority, without subjecting the 
property to any required controls (for example, property use restrictions, activity and use 
limitations, institutional controls, or engineering controls).” HRECs are not considered RECs 
when the remaining environmental conditions are compliant with the most current regulatory 
criteria.   No HRECs were identified at the Site. 
5.0 SITE RECONNAISSANCE 
A Site walkover was conducted on August 23, 2016 by Kurt Muller, Jeremy Matt, and 
Baxter Miatke of JCO.  During this walkover, the JCO staff was accompanied by Mr. Lee 
Beavin, a former employee of Grossman’s.  The weather conditions on the day of the Site visit 
were 73ºF and sunny.  Photographs taken during the Site visit are included as Appendix12. Mr. 
Beavin provided an appraisal document for the property that was conducted by Byrne Appraisal 
& Consulting Co. The appraisal contained specific information about the Grossman’s building, 
the shed (before it was partially destroyed by snow in 2008), and the surrounding property (see 
 
Appendix 13).  The lister’s card from the Montpelier City Clerk’s office (Appendix 14) indicates 
the parcel is comprised of 6.01 acres  of land classified as commercial with a large retail building 
built in approximately 1966 having primarily concrete block exterior and membrane roof cover 
(the main building). 
5.1 EXTERIOR OBSERVATIONS 
The Property is accessed by gravel driveway which leads from the Route 302/Route 2 
roundabout across the railroad tracks to the parking lot area to the south of the main building.   
The Property is bounded on the east and north by the Winooski River and by the tracks of the rail 
road to the south.  The southern (mostly open heavily vegetated areas with trees along the bank 
of the Winooski River) and central portions (consisting of the buildings and surrounding paved 
parking areas) of the Property are relatively flat, with the exception of the steep bank towards the 
Winooski River along the northeast property boundary, and are raised above the northern portion 
by between approximately 2-ft and 6-ft.  The northern portion of the Property is wooded and 
appears to slopes downward slightly to the north.  The northern portion becomes marshy as the 
ground elevation decreases.  The Site topography and the presence of angular granite chunks 
suggest that southern and central portions of the Property may have been raised with imported 
fill (possibly with granite waste rock from Barre’s granite industry). 
5.2.1 Area Surrounding Former Grossmans Building 
The areas immediately to the northwest, southwest, and southeast of the main building are 
paved.  This pavement is in poor condition (cracked and heaved with vegetation growing in the 
cracks). Chain-link fences (approximately 8-ft tall) limit access to the norther portion of the 
Property and enclose the area immediately to the southeast of the main building. The remaining 
portions of the Site are vegetated, with weedy open areas and trees along to the south.  During 
the Site walkover, Mr. Beavin indicated that the Property is served by an on-site septic system 
consisting of a septic tank and a leach field.  This system is located to the southeast of the main 
building; a sewer manhole cover is clearly visible in the lot area for the septic system.  The 
approximate location of the septic system is shown on Figure 3.  In addition to the septic system, 
 
a power utility pole with 3 transformers was noted to the southeast of the main building (see 
Photo 18). Additional details regarding this pole are provided in Section 4.4.2. 
 
Beneath the canopy attached to the southwest of the main building, a pile of floor tiles 
was observed (see Photo 4).  Mr. Beavin indicated that he had removed these from the main 
building before learning that they may be asbestos-containing (see Section 4.5.1 for additional 
details).  A pile of demolition debris from a former cabinet display was also present beneath the 
canopy.  
 
Along the drip edge of the canopy, an unpaved area approximately 6-ft in diameter was 
observed.  Mr. Beavin indicated that this was a sinkhole that had developed after Grossman’s 
vacated the building and that it had been filled with material removed from the southern portion 
of the Property.  A smaller sinkhole approximately 2-ft diameter and 1-ft deep was noted to the 
south of the larger sinkhole. 
 
Two storm drain inlets were noted in the asphalt area to the southwest of the main 
building.  These drains are in a line with an outfall which was observed at the northern edge of 
the asphalt area (see Photo 5).  A depression and a line of cut-and-repaired asphalt also connect 
these features. 
 
A railroad spur comes off of the main tracks along the edge of the parking lot west of the 
building ending at a pile of wooden railroad ties (see Photo 7).  The northern portion of the spur 
has been removed.   
 
To the northwest of the main building, there is an open air wooden shed structure (see 
Photo 6). Mr. Beavin indicated that this shed was formerly part of a larger pole barn structure 
that ran the length of the side of the northern edge of asphalt, but the rest of the structure 
collapsed due to snow in 2008 and was removed from the Site. A report dated May, 20, 2008 
 
from ATC Associates Inc. (Appendix 15) indicated that they did not find asbestos containing 
materials in samples from the green rolled asphalt roofing or tar paper from this old pole barn 
structure. 
5.2.2 Northern Woods Area / Former Manufactured Gas Plant Area 
 The area north of the front parking lot drops down approximately1-6 ft. into a fairly 
dense forest of trees and underbrush. The remnants of a stone foundation were observed in the 
western portion of the wooded area closest to the railroad tracks (see Photo 9). Due to the heavy 
vegetation and decomposed layer of organic material covering the entire area, it was imperative 
to use hand tools to remove this overlying layer in select areas in order to visually assess surface 
soil conditions.  An approximately 8-inch diameter pipe (open on both ends) was observed 
running under a portion of the stone foundation. This foundation is presumably associated with 
the former CCGC observed in the Sanborn maps. 
  
A concrete structure, which appeared to be foundation walls, was also noted in the 
wooded area. In the 1995 Phase I ESA this structure was referred to as a “concrete tank” 
although the exact use of this structure is unknown. The structure was roughly 20 ft. wide by 40 
ft. long with walls protruding approximately 5-ft above ground surface and a collapsed wall 
along the northern side (towards the river). A round penetration through the northwestern wall of 
the structure, visually estimated to be 4-6 inches in diameter and approximately 6-inches below 
the top of the wall, was noted. The presence of bolts and sockets (approximately 4-inches wide 
and 6-inches deep) along the top of the concrete wall suggest that it may have been covered at 
one point as seen in historical photographs from 1933 (Appendix 3). The inner surfaces of the 
structure were covered with a black coating within approximately 1-foot of the top of the wall 
(see Photo 11).  Similar material also had dripped down the outside of the concrete structure.  
This material was solid fractured along planes (similar to glass), and exhibited a faint coal tar 
odor.  Approximately 1 foot of standing water over sediment (mostly comprised of decomposed 
organic material) was present in the tank.    A metal tool was used to probe approximately 2 feet 
into the sediment at two locations.  The material recovered had a definite coal tar odor and sheen 
 
on it. Small sheens were also observed on the water surface as a result of disturbing the 
underlying sediment.  Additional probing was performed to the northeast of the structure (in a 
marshy area adjacent to the collapsed wall). This probing  exhibited a fainter coal tar odor, 
however, no sheens were observed. There was one corroded 55 gallon barrel sitting in the 
sediment with holes in it and one section of steel pipe (approximately 1-2 ft. long) in the concrete 
structure as well.  
 
A smaller concrete foundation covered by brush was noted immediately to the northeast 
of the larger concrete structure (see Photo 10), described above. There was one 55-gallon steel 
drum of unknown contents that was closed on both ends located near this small concrete 
foundation that appeared empty upon tapping it with a machete. Probing in this area also 
determined there was a slight coal tar odor approximately1-2 ft. into the surface.  This is in the 
general vicinity of the first of two former iron gas holder tank ‘footprints’ depicted on the 1945 
Sanborn fire insurance maps.  
 
Approximately 8-ft north and 17-ft west of the concrete structure a depression was noted, 
which may be associated with the location of the second of the two former gas holders depicted 
in the 1945 Sanborn fire insurance map. Minor soil probing in this area revealed there was a 
strong coal tar odor in the upper 2-ft of soil. In addition, sheens were noted on the soil and the 
metal tool became stained with coal tar (or similar).  
 
Approximately 30-40 ft. southeast of the concrete tank, a shovel was used to excavate to 
a depth of approximately 1.5 ft. below ground surface (fbgs) at two locations.  Evidence of a 
material resembling slag and other evidence of burnt coal and ash were observed in this area.   
 
Approximately 60-70 ft. north of the parking lot area (in a line with the canopy of the 
former Grossman’s building), a rectangular depression of approximately 5 ft. wide by 12 ft. long 
with a lack of vegetative growth was noted. A shovel was used to excavate to a depths of 1-2 
 
fbgs at six locations. A layer of dense fine sand with black staining and a definite coal tar odor 
was noted approximately 1-fbgs in three locations (see Photo 15). This depression may be the 
former tar well depicted in the 1945 Sanborn fire insurance map and labeled tar pit in the 1995 
Phase I ESA. 
5.2.3 Winooski River Streambank 
The river bank along the northeast property boundary was inspected for the presence of 
seeps; however, due to the thick vegetative cover and steep slopes visual inspection of the bank 
was limited.  One seep was observed exiting the toe of the river bank at a point approximately 
even with the northern edge of the main building and presumably downgradient to the east of the 
concrete structure and former iron gas holders (see Photo 17).  The flow rate out of this seep was 
estimated to be between 5 and 10 gallons per minute.  Some broken glass was noted in this area 
as well as soft orange material that may indicate high iron content in groundwater.  No sheens or 
odors were noted. No other seeps were observed along the river bank 
 
 In the area directly east of the current building along the river bank, there was large metal 
frame and a 10 gallon bucket with unknown material inside.  The outside of the bucket was 
partially coated with a black material consistent with roofing tar.  
 
Along the river bank of the northern portion of the property (approximately even with the 
concrete structure) a pile of rusted steel barrels were observed, which appeared to be of an older 
vintage than what is currently considered a common 55-gallon drum.  Most of these barrels 
appeared to be approximately 40-50 gallons capacity.  In addition to the two longitudinal ribs 
typical modern 55-gallon drums have, these drums had two steel bars with an “I” cross-section 
wrapped around them (see Photo 14).  Thick vegetation prevented an accurate count of these 
barrels, but there appeared to be approximately 20 barrels.  The former contents of these barrels 
are unknown, and Mr. Beavin indicated that he had no knowledge of them.  It should be noted 
that the 1933 photographs do show several piles of barrels, one of which is near the river bank.  
The interior of one barrel was probed through an existing rust hole and appeared to contain soil.  
 
No sheens or other evidence of contamination were noted in the barrel or in the soil immediately 
surrounding the barrels.  
5.2 INTERIOR OBSERVATIONS 
 A vacant retail warehouse and outdoor wooden storage shed were the only buildings on 
site at the time of the site reconnaissance. According to Mr. Beavin, the building has been vacant 
since the 1990’s. There was no equipment, shelving, tiling or other remnants of the former 
lumber company that occupied the main floor space of the building. The floor was concrete with 
patches of mastic from the floor tiles which were previously removed by Mr. Beavin (see Section 
4.5.1). The only interior partitions were a small office located in the approximate middle of the 
southwestern wall, two bathrooms, and utility closets in the northeast corner of the building.  The 
small front office in the front of the building had small miscellaneous item and the floor tiles had 
not been removed from this section of the building. The restrooms both had floor drains that Mr. 
Beavin indicated discharged to the on-site septic system. The utility closet containing electric 
equipment had a General Electric main breaker switch. Mr. Beavin indicated that this was the 
original panel. It was unable to be opened for inspection of electrical parts. There were also 
miscellaneous items on the shelves including rechargeable batteries, paint cans, waterproofing 
cans, and motor oil. Insulation was laying on the ground in back storage closet and in the main 
room on the second floor above the bathrooms. Fluorescent light fixtures were noted throughout 
the building, but could not be inspected for the presence of ballasts that potentially contained 
PCBs. 
5.3 SITE RECONNAISANCE SUMMARY 
In general, the following findings were noted during the site reconnaissance:  
 
• Possible sinkholes in parking lot areas; 
• A storm water drain in the main parking lot;  
• Pile of wooden railroad ties near tracks; 
• A breached concrete structure with standing water and sediment that appears to be 
impacted by coal tar; 
 
• Evidence of coal tar odors, sheens, and black stained material in soil associated 
with the former tar pit and iron gas tank areas, and area around the concrete 
structure; 
• A pile of approximately 20 barrels of varying size and conditions near the 
streambank, a 10-gallon bucket with black staining, and 55-gallon drum located 
partially buried in sediment within the concrete structure; 
• One groundwater seep directly east of the building;  
• A pile of floor tiles and construction debris under the building canopy (possibly 
asbestos containing); 
• Electrical  equipment, presumably from the mid-1960s, insider the current 
building (possibly PCB containing); 
• Remaining floor tiles in the hallways and small office of current building 
(possibly asbestos containing) 
• Fluorescent lighting throughout the building (ballasts may contain PCBs) 
• Floor drains in each of the two bathrooms that reportedly lead to an onsite septic 
system; and 
• Other miscellaneous items such as metal frames outside the building and paint 
cans and batteries inside the building. 
 
6.0 USER RESPONSIBILITIES 
In order to comply with Phase I ESA guidance documents, the user must provide the 
following information (if available) to the environmental professional: 
1. Environmental cleanup liens that are filed or recorded against the Site; 
2. Activity and land use limitations that are in place on the Site or that have been 
filed or recorded in a registry; 
3. Specialized knowledge or experience of the person seeking to qualify for the 
Limited Liability Protections (LLPs); 
4. Relationship of the purchase price to the fair market value of the property if it 
were not contaminated; 
5. Commonly known or reasonably ascertainable information about the property;  
6. The degree of obviousness of the presence or likely presence of contamination at 
the property and the ability to detect the contamination by appropriate 
investigation. 
The information listed above was addressed by Mr. Carlos Camarotti, the Vice President 
of 260 River Corp., who responded to the user questionnaire. Mr. Camarotti indicated that the 
property has been generally vacant since the 1990s, except for its use as a snow dump by the 
City of Montpelier and as a parking lot for a local car dealer.  A copy of the completed User 
questionnaire is included in Appendix 16. 
7.0 CONCLUSIONS & OPINIONS 
JCO has performed a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment in conformance with the 
scope and limitations of ASTM Practice E-1527 of the property located at 260 River St., 
Montpelier, VT (the Site).  This assessment has revealed no evidence of historical recognized 
environmental conditions (HRECs) in connection with the Site.   
 
This assessment has revealed no evidence of recognized environmental conditions 
(RECs) in connection with the property except for the following (see Sections 7.1 and 7.2):    
 
7.1 RECOGNIZED ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS AND OPINION 
JCO has identified the following recognized environmental conditions: 
1) The Site formerly hosted a manufactured gas plant (MGP) from approximately 1902-1957 
and there is reason to suspect that environmental media at the Site may have been adversely 
impacted by residual by-products from this operation. Sanborn fire insurance maps and 
historical photographs depict two former iron gas holders, a coal/coke storage area, a tar 
well, retorts, condensers, a tank in an engine room, a purifier house, and piles of barrels 
stored on Site associated with the MGP.  A coal and coke storage area is identified on the 
1925 Sanborn map in what appears to the “footprint” of the former Grossman’s building.  
Current evidence of the former MGP operation was identified in the wooded area north of the 
former Grossman’s building during the August 23, 2016 site reconnaissance visit, which 
included:  
a) A dilapidated rectangular concrete structure that appeared to have visual and olfactory 
evidence of coal tar within and immediately surrounding the structure; 
b) A pile of approximately 20 corroded barrels of unknown contents and varying size and 
condition were identified in the northeast corner of the property along the river bank 
under thick brush and undergrowth.  
c) Two buried concrete structures (possibly the “tar well” and/or “tar pit” as per the Sanborn 
maps) was identified and evidence of coal tar was observed in shallow soil within these 
structures; 
Miscellaneous pipes, containers (two 55-gallon drums and 10 gallon pail) and metal 
objects, were observed; 
 
Opinion:  Due to evidence in the field and the historical evidence regarding the operation of 
an onsite MGP during the first half of the 20
th century, there is reason to suspect that 
environmental media (soil, sediment, groundwater, soil vapor, and surface water) at the Site 
may be impacted by several contaminants including: volatile organic compounds (VOCs); 
semi-VOCs; metals, and cyanide (from purifier waste which often contain ferrocynides).  
JCO is of the opinion that this is a significant REC.  
2) A complaint filed in 2008 to VTDEC suggesting that sheens were observed in the Winooski 
River in the immediate vicinity of the Site, follow-up evaluation by VTDEC determined that 
the sheens were biological in nature; however, supplemental river water sampling did suggest 
the presence of petroleum constituents; 
 
Opinion:  Although JCO did not observe sheens in the river or evidence of petroleum 
impacted water exiting seeps along the banks of the Site, this REC suggests that residual 
MGP waste has the potential to adversely impact water quality in the Winooski River and 
therefore JCO is of the opinion that this REC should be considered moderately significant. 
 
3) A complaint filed in 2009 by a former Grossman’s employee suggested that pools of standing 
oil were present in the wooded area north of the current building; 
Opinion:  Although JCO did not observe pools of oil during the August 2016 site visit, 
evidence of residual MGP waste was observed and therefore JCO is of the opinion that this 
REC should be considered moderately significant. 
 
4) A former rail spur is located in the western portion of the Site, which was presumably used to 
transport coal and other material.  A pile of older vintage rail road ties, which may have been 
treated with creosote, is located towards the far northern end of this former rail spur.  
Furthermore an active rail corridor also forms the western boundary of the Site.  Potentially 
hazardous material is often transported by rail, locomotive engine exhaust historically tends 
to deposit partially burnt hydrocarbons on surrounding areas, and rail lines are often 
maintained with herbicides; 
 
 Opinion:  It is not uncommon that land immediately surrounding rail corridors may be 
impacted by contaminants as described above, and therefore JCO is of the opinion that this 
REC should be considered moderately significant. 
 
5) Residual petroleum contamination from neighboring properties may pose a potential risk to 
the property. Former Walker Motors is located on the opposite side of River Street/Route 2 
from the Site and is a Vermont listed hazardous site (SMS #880199 and #20033108).  The 
downgradient extent of dissolved phase petroleum contamination has not been defined and 
may extend under Route 2 in the direction of the 260 River Street property; 
 
Opinion:  Although the downgradient extent of petroleum impacts have not been defined 
JCO is of the opinion that this REC should be considered moderately significant considering 
the two properties are separated by Route 2 and the railroad property and the source has been 
removed. 
6) Two floor drains and an onsite septic system (located south of the former Grossman’s 
building) were identified.  It is unknown if potentially hazardous materials were introduced 
to this system; 
 
Opinion:  There is no evidence that industrial wastes or potentially hazardous materials were 
introduced to the onsite septic system.  However, considering the industrial past of the 
property and the possibility of hazardous liquid construction supplies (paint, solvent cleaning 
supplies, varnish, oils, etc.) rupturing and requiring clean up while Grossman’s was active, it 
is possible that potentially hazardous materials may have been introduced to the septic 
system.  JCO is of the opinion that this REC should be considered only moderately 
significant. 
 
7) A utility pole with three mounted transformers is located southeast of the former Grossman’s 
building.  Although no staining was observed in soil beneath the transformers according to 
Green Mountain Power these transformers were installed in 1965 and may contain PCBcontaining
materials;  
 
Opinion:  Considering one of the three pole mounted transforms had dark staining at the base 
and the transforms are potentially of a vintage when PCBs were consistently a component of 
dielectric transformer oil, JCO is of the opinion that this REC should be considered 
significant. 
7.2 ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 The following items are not formally considered RECs because they are beyond the 
scope of ASTM 1527-13.  However it is the environmental professional’s opinion that these 
items should be considered when making decisions regarding the redevelopment of the Site. 
1) The potential presence of asbestos-containing building materials, lead-based paint, and/or 
PCB-containing building materials is beyond the scope of ASTM 1527-13.  However, given 
the age and construction of the buildings, these materials may be present in buildings on the 
Site. 
 
Opinion:  An asbestos, lead paint, and PCB-building materials inspection by a licensed 
professional may be warranted if additional information is desired about these potential 
concerns. 
8.0 DATA GAPS/LIMITATIONS 
8.1 DATA GAPS 
The Site was covered in thick overgrowth and dense vegetation on day of site walkover. 
This vegetation may have obscured evidence of spills, stressed vegetation, objects, or any other 
potentially hazardous material that may be present on the Site. Additionally, the streambank was 
extremely steep and covered in thick vegetation, and therefore the entire stream bank could not 
be safely accessed or inspected.  
8.2 LIMITATIONS 
The conclusions of this ESA were based upon information obtained and made available 
to JCO from the following sources: EDR; the VTDEC; the Federal EPA; and from information 
gathered during the Site reconnaissance and interviews.  This information has been intended for 
the sole use of the Dickinson Development Corp. No other uses, expressed or implied, are 
warranted.  The design of the investigation was based on sound scientific techniques and 
experience with similar investigations.  Should additional information become available 
pertaining to environmental concerns that may be associated with the Site, the information 
should be made available to JCO so that we may re-evaluate our conclusions. 
